Title: Profiling Resilient to Change in Probe Position

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.24701v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 02:17:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Profiling Resilient to Change in Probe Position 

# Elie Bursztein 1, Michael Gruber 5, Karel Král 2, Jean-Michel Picod 2, Matthias Probst 4 and Georg Sigl 3,4 

> 1

Google, Sunnyvale, USA, scaaml@google.com  

> 2

Google, Zurich, Switzerland, scaaml@google.com  

> 3

School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, matthias.probst@tum.de  

> 4

Technical University of Munich TUM School of Computation, Information and Technology, 

georg.sigl@aisec.fraunhofer.de  

> 5

Fraunhofer Institute for Applied and Integrated Security (AISEC), Munich, Germany, 

michael.gruber@aisec.fraunhofer.de 

Abstract. Side Channel Analysis (SCA) relaxes the black-box assumption of con-ventional cryptanalysis by incorporating physical measurements acquired during cryptographic operations. Electro-magnetic (EM) emissions of a chip during com-putations often provide a very valuable source of side channel leakage. During the evaluation of a chip for electro-magnetic side channel emissions one needs to position an electro-magnetic probe in an advantageous position relative to the chip. Previous literature focused on hot-spot finding and to a lower extend repositioning. Trace augmentations have been considered to aid portability of profiling using one physical device and attacking another device. This paper focuses on training a single neural network using traces from multiple EM probe positions to detect leakage from a larger area over the attacked device. We provide dual evaluation of EM traces – from two completely independent labs – profiling on data from one lab and attacking traces from the other lab. 

Keywords: Side channel attacks · deep learning · electromagnetic emanations 

# 1 Introduction 

In many situations it is advantageous to use the electromagnetic emanations as a source of side channel information. These can be much more precisely targeted at a specific part of the device under test and thus greatly reduce the noise coming from activity unrelated to the computation of interest. However they come with their own set of challenges. Profiled EM attacks are generally not considered very portable due to the fact that one would need to find a very similar relative position of the chip and EM probe. The question arises whether the research is reproducible. Even when a research group publishes a dataset they would also need to publish a precise relative position. This could in theory be done on a de-processed chip using a camera and manual repositioning but very few publications considered this setting. The state of the art largely hurts not only reproducibility but also continuous testing during development. In case more data is needed later but the measurement setup has been modified for other campaigns in the meantime it is not an efficient strategy to discard all previous data. 

Non-profiled attacks such as CPA [ BCO04a ] attempt to directly extract information out of a given device under test without any profiling. This makes them immune to any EM probe re-positioning issues as there is no profiling chip and thus no discrepancy between the profiling position and the attack position or between the profiling and attacked chip. 

> arXiv:2604.24701v1 [cs.CR] 27 Apr 2026

2 Profiling Resilient to Change in Probe Position Much has been argued about the strengths and weaknesses of profiled vs non-profiled analysis and whether the assumption of having a profiling device is too strong or not. We believe that both approaches are valuable. However to compare these fairly in the context of EM leakage one must consider issues of probe repositioning and cross-device portability. 

Previous work has produced results for repositioning, some negative and some positive results for portability, and some trace adaptation techniques. Often these results were conducted with a large-diameter EM probes and not very secure implementations. See Section 4 for more details. 

Our contributions are the following: We profile on traces from multiple EM probe positions to better adapt to traces from the attack device where the relative position of the EM probe and chip might not be fully known. This method has been suggested before by [ GMD +20 ] as an interesting future research. Thanks to cross-institution collaboration we are the first to show a profiled attack with profiling data coming from a completely different lab – a completely different equipment located in two different countries and without ever visiting each other’s lab. We show that these results are obtainable on more convoluted implementations (hard-ware AES on STM32F415). Due to not having the same equipment this dataset has been captured on two setups by the same team but in different rooms and using different equipment (only the EM probe was shared). To battle very low leakage we develop a new hybrid technique of using a neural network as a signal amplifier for CPA. This technique is of independent interest. All of our experiments are conducted on off-the-shelf ChipWhisperer target boards (STM32F3 and STM32F4) without any de-capping. Moreover, these boards have their decoupling capacitors removed to ease power attacks at the cost of harder EM attacks. 

# 2 Background 

A prominent subclass of SCA is power analysis (PA). Differential power analysis (DPA) exploits a large number of power traces and a statistical distinguisher to recover secret information by correlating measured leakage with hypothetical models [ KJJ99 ]. To mitigate the combinatorial growth of hypotheses, DPA attacks typically employ a divide-and-conquer strategy in which the secret is decomposed into small subcomponents that are attacked independently and subsequently recombined. An effective targeted subcomponent has a sufficiently small domain to provide a managable hypothesis size and depends on both secret and public data so that competing hypotheses yield distinguishable leakage predictions. For varying public inputs, hypotheses are instantiated for the selected intermediate value and mapped to hypothetical power consumption using a leakage model, such as the Hamming weight or Hamming distance (HW or HD) model. For DPA or CPA, an adversary applies n distinct public inputs D to the device under test (DUT) and records the corresponding power traces while the cryptographic function 

f (D, s c) is evaluated under the secret parameter sc. The hypothesis space of candidate secrets is denoted by S = {s0, s 1, . . . , s |S|− 1}, where sc ∈ S represents the true secret. For each candidate sj ∈ S and each public input D, a hypothetical intermediate value is computed by simulating the relevant algorithmic component, i.e., by evaluating a reduced function f ′(D, s j ) following the divide-and-conquer approach. These intermediate values are mapped to predicted leakage using a leakage model, yielding a hypothesis matrix 

H ∈ Z|S|× n. Each hypothesis is statistically compared to the recorded traces using a distinguisher. In case of CPA, this is Pearson’s correlation coefficient [ BCO04b ]. The candidate whose predicted leakage exhibits the strongest statistically significant agreement E.Bursztein M.Gruber K.Král J-M Picod M.Probst G.Sigl 3with the measurements is identified as the correct secret sc, assuming the presence of exploitable data-dependent leakage. 

Machine Learning Side Channel Analysis While CPA relies on an explicit power model to compare hypotheses with measured traces, MLSCA replaces this model by training an ML algorithm to infer the processed data directly from observed traces. As a training-based approach, MLSCA belongs to the class of profiled SCA, in which a separate training device is used to learn a model that is subsequently applied to classify traces from the target device. Ideally, the training device is identical to the target and executes the same algorithm, while the secret data is fully controlled by the adversary to enable supervised training [HGDM +11, PHJ +17]. Let T ∈ Rn×m denote the matrix of measured power traces, where n is the number of measurements and m the number of sampled time points, and let S = {s0, . . . , s |S|− 1}

be the set of possible secrets. In a profiled setting, a training device is used to collect a labeled dataset 

Dtrain = {(ti, s i)}ntrain  

> i=1

,

where each trace ti ∈ Rm is associated with a known secret label si ∈ S .A machine-learning model gθ (·) with parameters θ is trained to approximate the posterior distribution 

p(s | t) ≈ gθ (t),

by minimizing an empirical loss function over Dtrain . After training, the model is applied to traces collected from the target device, yielding for each trace ti a vector of class scores or posterior probabilities ˆp(sj | ti) for all sj ∈ S .For a set of ntest target traces, evidence is aggregated across measurements, for example by summing log-likelihoods, 

Λj =

> ntest

∑

> i=1

log ˆ p(sj | ti),

and the recovered secret is identified as 

sc = arg max   

> sj∈S

Λj ,

provided that the learned model captures exploitable data-dependent leakage shared between the training and target devices. 

# 3 Threat Model 

We are following the standard profiled side channel assumptions [ CRR03 ] where the attacker has full access to a clone of the targeted device. Furthermore, we assume that the attacker has a set of tools to acquire EM traces from an untouched chip (no de-processing is allowed). The EM probe diameters are 250 μm and 500 μm . The positioning precision during the attack is limited to relative positioning of the EM probe and the chips packaging. The only scenario considered by our work is white-box meaning the evaluator has full control over the profiling device and the inputs and outputs of the cryptographic primitive. Having a model trained on the profiling device the evaluator attempts to capture similar traces from the targeted device while replicating the capture setups using different physical chip, oscilloscope, positioning equipment, and accessories of the same type and use the trained model to recover the secrets. 4 Profiling Resilient to Change in Probe Position 

# 4 Related Work 

Electromagnetic emanations have been suggested as a potential side channel by [ JJ00 ]. Initially unpublished work dates all the way back to [ NAC82 ]. A rich body of research has been published since. See literature review papers [ PPM +21 , ZSS24 ] for more references. Finding the leakage, optimizing the EM probe position, and automating this process is an active area of research, e.g., [JP21] and [MNS +25]. Portability of profiled side channel analysis has often been overlooked. Even relatively recent works [ DGD +19 , BCH +20 ] suggest that portability of power-based side channel attacks does not come for free. The landscape of portability of profiled EM-based SCA research can be roughly categorized into the following classes: 

Probe repositioning has been first studied by [ RWM19 ] to determine the relative position of an EM probe and device under test. The authors trained a deep neural network that given a trace returns an estimate of relative position (regression of the x, y coordinates). They used on-die measurements of the STM32L0 target by the Langer ICR HH150-27 probe and estimated the repositioning error to be roughly 50 μm . The repositioning error is roughly in the order of magnitude of the diameter and resolution of the probe given by the manufacturer: 150 μm and 100 μm , respectively. Unfortunately there is very little literature which would quantify the influence of these positioning errors on SCA. Repositioning was formulated as a classification problem on a grid (predicting a discrete grid point rather than a continuous position in a rectangle) by [ GMD +20 ]. They worked with an intact CW308T-XMega target using a 6 × 6 grid with a step of 2mm and about 

1mm above the chip surface. Measurements were taken using an H field probe with a coil diameter of 10 mm (TBPS01 EMC Near-Field Probe). Statistical properties of traces combined with various image matching methods have been used by [PWGS25] to speed up the repositioning process. 

Portability of profiled analysis , namely cross-device and cross-model portability, was studied by [ NLKS +24 ]. For their smartphone experiments the authors used various iPhones and attempted to identify which of a given set of 10 activities is running (e.g., calendar, email, ...). Due to differences present even in identical devices the authors had to use transfer learning techniques. Their results with classifying which program is running on an nRF52-DK were similar. Transfer between EM probe position and type (Langer near-field RF-B 0,3-3 and RF-K 7-4) can be successful on the same device as reported by [ GMHG21 ] using an AtMega8515 micro-controller running an ASCAD implementation of AES-128 (with a masking countermeasure). 

Adapting traces using various preprocessing techniques to reduce the differences between devices is a natural approach followed by various teams. A combination of pre-processing techniques like PCA, LDA, and FFT with a training device selection algorithm has been used by [ DDG +21 ] to show a cross-device attack on an 8-bit ATXmega128D4. [ MBTL13 ]achieve significant effectiveness improvements of cross-device template attacks using zero mean and unit variance normalization while targeting 16-bit PIC24F micro-controllers. An unsupervised fine-tuning phase was introduced by [ CZLG21 ] for the pre-trained model on Atmel XMEGA MCUs and SAKURA-G evaluation boards. The fine-tuning phase takes the original profiling traces and the unlabeled attack traces and uses the technique minimizing a distribution distance metric known from domain adaptation [GBR +12]. The high potential of deep learning attacks against secure implementations of RSA (EAL4+ certified arithmetic co-processor) has been identified by [ CCC +19 ]. The authors also report that profiling portability (profiling on a device A and attacking a device B) works well in their setting. The most comprehensive evaluation of pre-processing techniques so far and a large-scale dataset has been published by [ NNR +24 ] on both 8-bit and 32-bit targets (AVR XMEGA and STM32F3) with random delays. E.Bursztein M.Gruber K.Král J-M Picod M.Probst G.Sigl 5

Table 1: Dataset overview. For more information see Section 5.1. The column Splits contains the number of traces in Train / Test / Holdout splits in millions of traces. Name Author Grid Step [mm] Splits Chip EM Probe SW-AES-Mun Munich lab 11 × 11 × 2 0.5 12.8/1.6/1.4 STM32F3 HH 250-75 [Land] SW-AES-Zrh Zurich desk 11 × 11 × 2 0.5 15.8/6.2/6.2 STM32F3 HH 250-75 [Land] SW-AES-Zrh fine Zurich desk 101 × 101 × 1 0.05 0/0/10.4 STM32F3 HH 250-75 [Land] SW-AES-Zrh hotspot Zurich desk 1 × 1 × 1 0.0 7.9/0.025/0.025 STM32F3 HH 250-75 [Land] HW-AES-T Zurich basement 5 × 5 0.25 11.5/1.1/3.2 STM32F4 Riscure [Ris] HW-AES-H Zurich desk 5 × 5 0.25 0/0/3.2 STM32F4 Riscure [Ris] HW-AES-H2 Zurich desk 11 × 11 0.25 0/0/89.8 STM32F4 Riscure [Ris] SL-STM [NNR +24] 3 × 3 2.3 1.215/0.135/0.15 STM32F3 RF 7-4 [Lanc] SL-XM [NNR +24] 3 × 3 2.3 1.215/0.135/0.15 XMEGA RF 7-4 [Lanc] 

# 5 Methodology 

Our goal is to ensure portability as much as possible. One of our datasets has been captured half in one lab and half by the another lab in a completely different geographic location. The other dataset could not have been replicated due to the same equipment not being available at one of the labs. We plan to publish our datasets to aid more experiments. The focus is on datasets with traces coming from multiple known EM probe positions – a (x, y, z ) grid or just (x, y ) grid when the distance from the device under test – the z

coordinate – is fixed. Table 1 contains an overview of used datasets. Side channel analysis is given in Sections 6 and 7. 

# 5.1 Dataset Collection 

First we identify a source of leakage using an SNR [ Man04 ] grid search and then confirm that both CPA [ BCO04a ] works and a neural network can be trained there. Then we capture a dataset of EM measurements from each place of an n × n grid centered around the source of leakage. We capture a grid dataset at Munich lab and with a different setup at Zurich desk. The repositioning was done by eye (a photo) without any hot-spot finding at Zurich desk. In all measurements we use an unprocessed chip (no de-capping) and off-the-shelf ChipWhisperer targets without a decoupling capacitor. The removal of a decoupling capacitor is usually done to improve power consumption leakage usually at the expense of EM leakage ultimately making our analysis harder. Positioning of the EM probe was done using a Langer ICS 105 table [ Lane ]. The ChipWhisperer target board has been fixed in place using either clamps or adhesive tape. Neither solution allows for precise replication of an existing setup. Munich lab used PicoScope 6402 (SW-AES-Mun) while Zurich desk used PicoScope 6424E (SW-AES-Zrh, HW-AES-T, HW-AES-H, HW-AES-H2) since these models were avail-able. We do not expect the oscilloscope model difference to play a significant role in our measurements. 

5.1.1 Software AES 

SW-AES-Mun and SW-AES-Zrh contain measurements of electromagnetic emanations caused by a custom unprotected software implementation of AES128 running on an STM32F303RCT7 target. Half of the dataset has been captured in Munich lab and another half in Zurich desk. We specify the whole chip since initially one of the labs unknowingly used a different STM32F3 chip and we confirm that there are differences between STM32F303RCT7 and STM32F303RBT6 as noted by [ cws ]. The measurements for SW-AES-Mun are collected using the Langer HH 250-75 [ Land ] through a bias-tee [ Lanb ]to a 30 dB amplifier [ Lana ] and 1V for the channel sensitivity and PicoScope 6402 and 8 bits of ADC resolution. The bias-tee [ Lanb ] acts as a bandpass filter of 500kHz-6GHz. Interestingly SW-AES-Zrh needed 2V channel sensitivity to avoid overflows. SW-AES-Zrh 6 Profiling Resilient to Change in Probe Position has been captured using PicoScope 6424E with 12bit ADC resolution. The distance between the probe and the chip is less than 0.2mm in the closer half of the 11 × 11 × 2

grid. The farther half of the dataset is 0.25 mm farther from the original while the grid step was 0.5mm and thus covering an area of 25 mm 2. The distance was confirmed by eye and almost crashing into the chip. The chip clock was fed by ChipWhisperer and was set to 10MHz and the oscilloscope sampling rate is 625MHz. A single trace consists of 7,000 points capturing the whole AES computation. We use the input of the first round S-BOX as our target values. Due to differences in our capture scripts the SW-AES-Mun dataset the X-axis is increasing left to right and the Y-axis is increasing bottom to top. In the SW-AES-Zrh the X-axis is also increasing left to right but the Y-axis is increasing top to bottom. Another notable difference is that Munich lab represented their traces as integer values of ADC while Zurich desk represented voltage values. This results in different amplitudes but since the ADC to voltage scaling is linear this difference poses no issue. We normalize the trace values to the interval [−1, 1] based on maximum and minimum over all traces captured by a concrete lab. This is consistent with standard deep learning practices (see for instance [Cho21 ]). As usual with software implementations of AES we attack the first round S-BOX values. 

5.1.2 Hardware Accelerated AES 

The ChipWhisperer HW-AES firmware was run on two STM32F415RGT6 targets with hardware acceleration for AES. A smaller 5 × 5 grid was captured to make our experiments more tractable. We also opted for smaller step since we expected hardware accelerated leakage to be more localized. Thus we captured with a grid step of 0.25 mm covering an area of 1mm 2. Split sizes and grid dimensions are shown in Table 1. Repositioning was done using a photo of the previous setup without any optical aid. The whole dataset was captured by Zurich desk (using PicoScope 6424E) since we could not capture the other part of the dataset in the other place due to a lack of availability of an equivalent EM probe. Two setups were used to maximize portability and the capture campaigns were run in two different rooms (the lab denoted as Zurich basement and a work desk denoted as Zurich desk). The only piece of equipment shared by these two setups was a single Riscure EM probe [ Ris ] with the 0.5mm coil tip. The probe was chosen as it gave us better SNR (still very low). We chose of this EM probe to improve the signal quality in these specific settings. We captured a holdout split in HW-AES-T since hyper-tuning was necessary and also to be able to test our hybrid approach. For the leakage model we use the last round Hamming distance as suggested by [ cwT ]. At first we tried to either directly predict the last round Hamming distance as a classification problem or as a regression. The training was unstable and we resorted to using a hybrid approach described in Section 6.6. We saw leakage practically everywhere in our HW-AES-H but the number of traces was not enough for a full key recovery. Thus we also captured an 11 × 11 grid (covering 2.5 × 2.5mm ) in HW-AES-H2. 

5.1.3 Publicly Available Datasets 

We additionally use datasets published by [ NNR +24 ] to foster comparability to existing research. Similarly to [ NNR +24 ] we directly target the output of the first round S-BOX. To isolate from the influence of trace adaptations and preprocessing techniques we limit ourselves only to the raw traces. The two datasets SL-XM (AVR XMEGA), resp., SL-STM (STM32F3) come from chips target X1, resp., target S1 where only the center position of the grid has been captured. A full 3 × 3 grid has been captured over the targets X2 and S2. Thus we are limited in our experiments. We choose training on the full grid and E.Bursztein M.Gruber K.Král J-M Picod M.Probst G.Sigl 7

Table 2: Hyperparameters of the GPAM model [BIK +24]. Hyperparameter SWAES HWAES SL-STM SL-XM Batch size 64 256 64 64 Steps per epoch 400 500 400 400 Epochs 150 150 900 900 Learning rate 0.0005 0.0001 0.0005 0.0005 Merge filter 1, 2 0 0 0 0Trace length 7,000 10,000 5,000 5,000 Patch size 70 100 100 100 evaluating accuracy over the center position. Such experiments unfortunately provide no information regarding position resilience but the other choice would limit us to profiling traces from a single location. Due to the type of EM probe used (EMV RF 7-4 Near-Field Probe with resolution of roughly 5mm [Lanc ]) the grid step (smallest distance of two grid points) is about 2.3mm and the area from which the probe captures signal is significantly larger than in our experiments. 

# 5.2 Multiple Place Training 

Profiling with traces from multiple locations has been proposed by [ GMD +20 ]. Using the analogy of image classification normalizing and centering images used to be common in the early research such as in the MNIST dataset [ LBBH98 ]. However the amount of diverse data and larger deep learning models start performing better when normalization becomes more challenging with real world photography images. We argue that instead of trying to come up with ways to make the traces appear to be taken from the same place we just let the model automatically adjust to the available data. As described in Section 5.1 we first identify a source of leakage and capture a grid around it. We use training and validation split from each grid position to quantify how much leakage our deep learning model can detect. Effectively we are creating a heatmap of leakage. We conduct another profiling phase training with all grid points where there was non-trivial leakage detected. This trained model is then evaluated on each grid point from the attack target. Section 6 provides ablation experiments – changing this methodology to see which aspects are beneficial. 

# 6 Deep-Learning Results 

We start by presenting our main result according to Section 5. Ablation studies then follow investigating influence of our methodology choices on the our analysis. One can compare some of these results with those in Section 7. For our experiments we build upon the model of [ BIK +24 ] to predict attack points in either classification or regression mode. We have done little or no hyper-tuning. The patch size is chosen to be a number which both divides the trace length and is roughly close to its square root. Merge filters are set to zero since our traces are short compared to the original paper. We use the Adafactor [ SS18 ]optimizer and follow the GPAM tutorial 1 recommendations. Hyperparameters for all our ML experiments are listed in Table 2. It is possible that a hyper-parameter search would yield better results. As usual in deep learning we normalize the trace values into the interval [−1, 1] by linear scaling using the maximum and minimum over all traces regardless of grid position. 

> 1https://google.github.io/sedpack/tutorials/sca/gpam/

8 Profiling Resilient to Change in Probe Position 

Table 3: Results of training from a single grid point on the software AES128. Values are averages of validation mean ranks during the second half of training targeting the index 11 of the S-BOX input in the first round. SW-AES-Mun close SW-AES-Mun far SW-AES-Zrh close SW-AES-Zrh far 

Table 4: Results of training from a combined grid points with significant leakage on the software AES128 evaluated on one of the datasets while trained on the other. Values are mean ranks of 5,000 holdout traces targeting the index 11 of the S-BOX input in the first round. The captions are which dataset has been used to evaluate. SW-AES-Mun close SW-AES-Mun far SW-AES-Zrh close SW-AES-Zrh far 

However due to different capture settings between SW-AES-Mun (integer ADC values) and SW-AES-Zrh (floating point voltage values) we need to scale by different factors. 

# 6.1 Portability and Position Resilience 

In this section we present our main experiment showing both portability between different setups and chips and resilience to changes in the EM probe position. For our SW-AES-Mun and SW-AES-Zrh datasets we choose to target the values of S-BOX input of the first round, i.e., the key xor plain-text. No significant change in leakage detection or different levels of leakage was observed between different indices. However doing multi-class learning for all 16 indices at once was roughly six to seven times slower. Thus we restrict ourselves to the index 11 which was chosen at random. Table 3 shows the leakages from a single grid point. To combat possible over-fitting and to give more accurate results we present the averages of valuation results from the second half of the training. Our selection parameter for a significant leakage is the mean rank value at most 120 (with 127 .5 being the random choice). Any grid point with lower mean rank is selected for the position resilient training. This selection strategy resulted in roughly 20% of grid points from the closer and 12% from the farther set to be used. Table 4 clearly shows there is leakage present even in the portability scenario of profiling on one chip and evaluating on another. However we do see a significant performance drop compared to Table 3. E.Bursztein M.Gruber K.Král J-M Picod M.Probst G.Sigl 9

Table 5: Comparison of multi-place training (only the closer leakage positions) against training from the hot-spot while using much more data. The description is training method, either multi-place or hot-spot / which distance has been evaluated, either close or far. All training has been done on SW-AES-Zrh or the single place hot-spot version. Multi-place/close Multi-place/far Hot-spot/close Hot-spot/far Evaluated on SW-AES-Mun: 

Evaluated on SW-AES-Zrh: 

# 6.2 Amount of Training Data 

The usual metric in SCA is the number of traces needed to reveal some non-trivial information. In the particular case of profiling attacks we usually talk about a tradeoff between the amount of training data and attack/evaluation data. In either case one attempts to use as few data as possible. Deep learning on the other hand scales with additional good quality data. When training with all the data from multiple (x, y, z )

coordinates we inadvertently use more data during the profiling phase. To fairly compensate for this fact we redo some of our experiments with the same or larger amount of training data. This helps us to distinguish whether we are benefiting more from the amount of training data or more from the diversity of the data. Note that we have already captured more data and, in practice, we do not want to waste that effort. To tackle this potential issue we captured a large set of training traces at the closer position of the SW-AES-Zrh hot-spot (position (6 , 5) in Table 3). Concretely we captured 7.9M training traces which corresponds to the amount of traces captured in the closer half of SW-AES-Zrh, e.g., a half of the total size. Thus roughly five times more data than multi-place training from the closer half of SW-AES-Zrh (and 3.5-times more data than multi-place training combining close and far EM probe positions). Due to the amount of data we were also able to train much more (50,000 epochs vs 150 epochs) while still improving the validation accuracy. The result of cross-device evaluation is shown in the first row of Table 5. In the portability setting the multi-place training clearly wins over the hot-spot which can produce significant leakage in just one of the grid points. Another aspect of comparing the training with the comparable amount of data is how much does the data diversity contribute to better results during displacement. The second row of Table 5 shows that training on a hot-spot is significantly more accurate than multi-place trained network on the hot-spot position (no displacement at all). But that is the only point where hot-spot training is better. The hot-spot trained model is much more sensitive to the x, y displacement. Additionally the hot-spot trained model is also very 10 Profiling Resilient to Change in Probe Position 

Table 6: A fine grid of 101 × 101 grid points closer to the chip covering an area of 

5mm × 5mm with a step of 0.05 mm . Evaluations of mean rank comparing multi-place training with training from a hot-spot. Note that the middle column corresponds to profiling on SW-AES-Mun data while evaluating on SW-AES-Zrh. The other two columns correspond to both profiling and evaluating on SW-AES-Zrh. The last row shows where the mean rank is below the threshold 120 (fully random is 127.5). Multi-place (close) SW-AES-Zrh Multi-place (close) SW-AES-Mun Hot-spot training 

sensitive to z displacement compared to the multi-place model which was also trained only traces from the closer distance to the chip. Comparing the multi-place training purely to Table 3 which had much fewer examples to train with would be unfair. 

# 6.3 Interpolation 

Our claims of position resilience might not be sound in the extremely unlikely case that two grids of two different setups would overlap exactly or almost exactly. In such a case we would have shown only device to device transfer on the grid points but perhaps not inbetween these grid points. To avoid capturing an excessive amount of data we capture just 1,024 traces from each fine grid point and plot heatmap of average rank. Table 6 shows smooth leakage values between the original training grid points. It is clear that the multi-place trained cross-device evaluated neural network is able to detect leakage where the hot-spot trained model does not. The leakage is much smaller due to using less data (discussed in Section 6.2) and a different measure setup. 

# 6.4 Distance from the Device Under Test 

The inverse-square law tells us that the intensity of EM signal is proportional to the reciprocal of the square of the distance. Thus the farther the EM probe the smaller signal we expect. We show that our analysis is independent of the precise probe distance to the extent permitted by the inverse-square law. To avoid the possibility that the two labs by chance managed to place the probe in the exact same distance we use the closer SW-AES datasets to train and evaluate on the farther and vice versa. Using a 3D-positioning table placing the probe tip within 0.25 mm of the chip is possible using a naked eye. Table 7 shows that when training multi-place with constant distance then change of device and E.Bursztein M.Gruber K.Král J-M Picod M.Probst G.Sigl 11 

Table 7: Mean rank when training multi-place on one distance of either SW-AES-Mun or SW-AES-Zrh and evaluating at another distance of the other dataset. In both datasets the close and far are at distance 0.25 mm . Thus at least one of the heatmaps corresponds to training on one device and evaluating on another where the EM probe distance from the device changes by at least 0.25 mm . To allow concise representation we use the following notation: dataset D1/D 2 meaning we train multi-place on the given dataset with distance 

D1 and evaluate on the other dataset at distance D2 where C means close and F far. SW-AES-Mun C/F SW-AES-Mun F/C SW-AES-Zrh C/F SW-AES-Zrh F/C 

EM probe distance of at least 0.25 mm does not completely distort the signal. 

# 6.5 Training with All Data 

Given the result of this section one might also ask what happens when we would train on all captured data. Figure 8 shows that using a lot of data with very small leakage information does not bring a great advantage. We can see that the top leakage is lower compared to selecting grid points with significant leakage to train. On the other hand we see slightly larger resilience to the position as a small but noticeable leakage is being detected even along the grid edges. 

# 6.6 Hardware Accelerated AES Hybrid Approach 

One may face different challenges when considering hardware accelerated implementations. We thus repeat some of our experiments with STM32F4 hardware accelerated AES. As suggested by [ DO ] we target the last round Hamming distance. Due to the low leakage and thus poor deep learning metrics we first moved from classification of last round Hamming distance to a regression formulation. The neural network instability during classification manifested itself by predicting either zero or eight as the Hamming distance in majority of predictions and even these two classes would be greatly biased. Reinterpreting the problem as regression was not enough and we saw just minute improvements over random results. For our evaluation we resorted to a hybrid approach of using the neural network as a signal amplifier. We feed a trace to the neural network which outputs 16 floating point numbers representing the 16 Hamming distances in the last round (that is 16 times a regression instead of classification). The 16 floats would then be fed into a classical CPA instead of the original trace during the attack phase. This hybrid approach works remarkably well in our setting – one can compare results of Tables 9 and 10 with Table 14. To the best of our knowledge this is the first use of this technique. The closest to this technique might be the paper [ LBHL25 ] where the authors use a denoising diffusion transformer followed by a classification convolutional neural network. In our case the classification part is CPA. We reduce the number of our experiments and do not repeat all of them for hardware accelerated AES. The grids in Table 9 show that at least on the training chip there is detectable leakage everywhere. On the HW-AES-H dataset we have not achieved full key discovery in 128k traces. Thus we recaptured a similar HW-AES-H2 with significantly more traces per position and 12 Profiling Resilient to Change in Probe Position 

Table 8: Training with all data on one dataset and evaluating on the other dataset. Compare with Table 4 where just grid points with significant leakage were used. Trained SW-AES-Mun Trained SW-AES-Zrh 

Table 9: Evaluation of the hybrid approach attack trained on HW-AES-T evaluated on the holdout part of the same dataset. The left grid shows how many thousand traces were needed to fully disclose the secret key in case the key was not fully recovered in 128k traces we write infinity. We also provide the average rank of the correct byte value after 128k traces to identify if there was at least partial leakage. Traces until disclosure [thousands] Average rank after 128k traces E.Bursztein M.Gruber K.Král J-M Picod M.Probst G.Sigl 13 

Table 10: Evaluation of the hybrid approach attack trained on HW-AES-T evaluated on the HW-AES-H2. The grid step is 0.25 mm covering the total grid area of 2.5 × 2.5mm 2.Traces until disclosure [thousands] Average rank after 742k traces 

Table 11: Mean rank of S-Box input byte 0 on the SL-XM and SL-STM datasets of [NNR +24]. We use the X2 and S2 data for training and the X1 and S1 data for holdout. SL-XM X2 SL-XM X1 SL-STM S2 SL-STM S1 

a larger area. The probe position between HW-AES-H and HW-AES-H2 has been moved. However we have not retrained the model again (it was trained on data from a different chip and room anyway). 

# 6.7 Multi-place Training with the [NNR +24] Datasets 

Evaluating multi-place training on SL-XM and SL-STM can be done only by comparing how much leakage we detect on the holdout part which is a single grid point. We thus opt to revert the meaning of dataset splits of [ NNR +24 ]. We train on their SL-XM X2 and SL-STM S2 which are 3 × 3 grids (135k training, 15k validation). And reserve the single grid point from the X1 and S1 chips for holdout (150k traces). Unfortunately this makes our results not directly comparable since our training and validation splits are swapped. But overall whenever [ NNR +24 ] saw leakage on a grid point we were able to train on that grid point and see leakage on the other chip. Table 11 shows single grid point leakages in validation and holdout data. Interestingly we see a lot of accuracy decrease in the cross-chip detected leakage levels in SL-XM but less in the SL-STM. It is likely that our deep learning model specialized too much on the details of the training chip traces. Table 12 shows what happens when we use traces from the top n grid positions. We 14 Profiling Resilient to Change in Probe Position 

Table 12: The mean rank on the holdout chip (either X1 or S1) when training on data from multiple places of the training chip (either X2 or S2). In each experiment we combine n

positions with the best performance on the validation split (either X2 or S2, see Table 11). We either use all available data for training or limit the data to at most 135k examples similarly to the one position training. Better results than single point training (either lower than 68 for XMEGA and 91 for STM) are shown in bold. Combined positions 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9Limited data XMEGA 67.4 70.5 17.8 37.9 33.2 40.3 28.0 30.0 

All data XMEGA 39.3 50.8 28.7 53.2 43.2 34.4 38.2 38.9 

Limited data STM 89.4 78.7 83.8 80.2 127.4 127.7 74.1 73.1 

All data STM 77.8 71.2 71.5 74.1 70.5 71.5 75.3 72.7 

either use all data or compensate by taking at most 135k traces similar to single grid point training. In almost all cases multi-place training outperforms single grid point training. In the case of SL-STM using all data consistently gives better results up to one case where the result is close. This is consistent with the expectation of deep learning scaling with more data. Surprisingly in the case of SL-XM we see that limiting the amount of data gives a better result in more than half cases. We have no good explanation for this phenomenon. We just remark that limiting or not limiting the amount of data does not seem to affect the validation performance. 

# 7 Classical Attacks 

Prior research has evaluated classical attacks in the setting of portability and position resilience as discussed in Section 4. However to the best of our knowledge no experiments with multi-place profiling have been done. Classical profiled attacks such as template attacks [ CRR03 ] greatly benefit from trace alignment and ideally picking of points of interest. But they would also suffer from differences caused by different EM probe position. Our traces are synchronized by the trigger and one could in principle align them further using known techniques. In this section we provide results of classical techniques to compare observed leakage. Thanks to the unsupervised nature of CPA [ BCO04a ] we can estimate how much leakage there is in each of the grid points. We present heatmaps of the average rank of the correct key byte value after the whole holdout set and or the number of traces until full key disclosure whichever makes more sense for the concrete dataset. We avoid using the guessing entropy defined by [ SMY09 ]since we would be either providing estimates or need to exactly specify the enumeration procedure for key guesses. We rather mark the number of traces until complete key disclosure or provide the average rank of the correct key byte value. A realistic attacker could choose to trade-off the amount of data for more compute. We omit classical experiments on the Table 11 since those are well studied already in the original publication. 

# 7.1 SW AES 

Table 13 is showing a much larger area where leakage is detectable on the SW-AES-Zrh compared to the SW-AES-Mun. This is due to the SW-AES-Zrh having more than four times as many traces per grid point than SW-AES-Mun. This was caused by misspecification of the amounts of traces. The capture setups were altered before we noticed this difference. We decided against artificially limiting the amount of traces as more traces give us a better idea about the present leakage. Another difference is that E.Bursztein M.Gruber K.Král J-M Picod M.Probst G.Sigl 15 

Table 13: The number of traces needed until full key disclosure (in thousands). Whenever the full key was not fully recovered using the amount of holdout traces we note it as inf .The average key byte rank is shown in the second row. SW-AES-Mun close SW-AES-Mun far SW-AES-Zrh close SW-AES-Zrh far Thousands of holdout traces until full key disclosure: inf is more than 6, 000 inf is more than 25 , 600 

Average rank of the correct byte value after 

6, 000 holdout traces: 25 , 600 holdout traces: 

SW-AES-Mun holdout is not fixed key and thus we needed to simulate a fixed key by changing the plaintext for the use of CPA. 

# 7.2 HW AES 

Table 14 shows that CPA was rather inefficient against the HW accelerated AES imple-mentation. 

# 8 Conclusion and Future Directions 

Repeatability and transferability of attacks from one device to another has not been in an ideal state especially for the electromagnetic emanations. We provide a new set of large scale datasets captured by different teams and in different places to extend on pioneering work of portability of profiled side channel analysis. Section 6 shows that training on EM traces captured from multiple different positions gives more position resilient results when evaluated on traces from another chip. This is very promising since it provides better results when evaluating on a different chip while using roughly the same amount of profiling data. Moreover we are no longer forced to throw away data captured during the initial hot-spot search. These experiments confirm that repositioning over the attack chip is possible using just a naked eye and a photo of the other setup. Comparing the promising interpolation and extrapolation results of Section 6.3 and comparable but slightly lower maximal leakage when training will all data (Section 6.5). One could suggest more elaborate schemata for selecting training data. Section 7.1 shows that there is leakage in a larger area than we used for our multi-place training. Figuring out how to use traces from grid points with lower level of signal might provide much 16 Profiling Resilient to Change in Probe Position 

Table 14: CPA on hardware accelerated AES where we provide the average rank of the correct byte value after given number of traces (in thousands) to identify if there was at least partial leakage. We target the Hamming weight of the last round diff similarly to our ML experiment. HW-AES-H (128k traces) HW-AES-H2 (742k traces) 

more information and even more resilience during repositioning. One could first train on places with more signal and slowly mix in traces from grid points with lower signal similarly to [ LH17 ]. Very fine grids for training data acquisition would provide smoother interpolation of position-dependent trace changes. This might have positive effect on both training and generalizability. We leave these experiments as an interesting future direction. Due to our positioning equipment we have trained from regularly spaced grid points. This provided us with great deal of precision when evaluating the attack phase and doing ablation studies since we knew exactly where the holdout traces have been captured. But not all labs have precise positioning devices due to their high price or due to another experiment using them. Our multi-place training was benefiting already when traces were coming from ten or twenty grid positions. The interpolation experiments of Section 6.3 suggest that there is nothing special about grid points in the attack phase. It is thus plausible to assume that one would get similar results using a hand positioned probe holding device and repositioning it slightly several times during capture. An experiment is needed to confirm this intuition. Due to the amount of captured data we have focused only on variants of AES. However extending these experiments to other cryptographic primitives would be an interesting research in itself. 

# References 

[BCH +20] Shivam Bhasin, Anupam Chattopadhyay, Annelie Heuser, Dirmanto Jap, Stjepan Picek, and Ritu Ranjan Shrivastwa. Mind the portability: A warriors guide through realistic profiled side-channel analysis. In NDSS 2020 . The Internet Society, February 2020. [BCO04a] Eric Brier, Christophe Clavier, and Francis Olivier. Correlation power analysis with a leakage model. In Marc Joye and Jean-Jacques Quisquater, E.Bursztein M.Gruber K.Král J-M Picod M.Probst G.Sigl 17 editors, CHES 2004 , volume 3156 of LNCS , pages 16–29. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, August 2004. [BCO04b] Eric Brier, Christophe Clavier, and Francis Olivier. Correlation power analysis with a leakage model. In International workshop on cryptographic hardware and embedded systems , pages 16–29. Springer, 2004. [BIK +24] Elie Bursztein, Luca Invernizzi, Karel Král, Daniel Moghimi, Jean-Michel Picod, and Marina Zhang. Generalized power attacks against crypto hardware using long-range deep learning. IACR TCHES , 2024(3):472–499, 2024. [CCC +19] Mathieu Carbone, Vincent Conin, Marie-Angela Cornelie, Francois Dassance, Guillaume Dufresne, Cecile Dumas, Emmanuel Prouff, and Alexandre Venelli. Deep learning to evaluate secure RSA implementations. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2019/054, 2019. [Cho21] François Chollet. Deep learning with Python . Simon and Schuster, 2021. [CRR03] Suresh Chari, Josyula R. Rao, and Pankaj Rohatgi. Template attacks. In Burton S. Kaliski, Jr., Çetin Kaya Koç, and Christof Paar, editors, 

CHES 2002 , volume 2523 of LNCS , pages 13–28. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, August 2003. [cws] Chipwhisperer supported devices. https://chipwhisperer.readthedocs. io/en/latest/chipwhisperer-target-cw308t/CW308T_STM32F/README. html#supported-devices . Accessed: 2025-04-22. [cwT] ChipWhisperer tutorial CPA on Hardware AES Implementation. 

https://github.com/newaetech/chipwhisperer-jupyter/blob/main/ courses/sca201/SOLN_Lab%202_2%20-%20CPA%20on%20Hardware%20AES% 20Implementation.ipynb . Accessed: 2025-05-02. [CZLG21] Pei Cao, Chi Zhang, Xiangjun Lu, and Dawu Gu. Cross-device profiled side-channel attack with unsupervised domain adaptation. IACR TCHES ,2021(4):27–56, 2021. [DDG +21] Josef Danial, Debayan Das, Anupam Golder, Santosh Ghosh, Arijit Ray-chowdhury, and Shreyas Sen. Em-x-dl: efficient cross-device deep learning side-channel attack with noisy em signatures. ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems (JETC) , 18(1):1–17, 2021. [DGD +19] Debayan Das, Anupam Golder, Josef Danial, Santosh Ghosh, Arijit Ray-chowdhury, and Shreyas Sen. X-DeepSCA: Cross-device deep learning side channel attack. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2019/818, 2019. [DO] Alex Dewar and Colin O’Flynn. Cpa on hardware aes implementation. 

https://github.com/newaetech/chipwhisperer-jupyter/blob/main/ courses/sca201/SOLN_Lab%202_2%20-%20CPA%20on%20Hardware%20AES% 20Implementation.ipynb . Accessed: 2025-09-03. [GBR +12] Arthur Gretton, Karsten M Borgwardt, Malte J Rasch, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola. A kernel two-sample test. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 13(1):723–773, 2012. [GMD +20] Anupam Golder, Baogeng Ma, Debayan Das, Josef Danial, Shreyas Sen, and Arijit Raychowdhury. 120.147 efficient electromagnetic side channel analysis by probe positioning using multi-layer perceptron. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2020/988, 2020. 18 Profiling Resilient to Change in Probe Position [GMHG21] Christophe Genevey-Metat, Annelie Heuser, and Benoît Gérard. Trace-to-trace translation for sca. In International Conference on Smart Card Research and Advanced Applications , pages 24–43. Springer, 2021. [HGDM +11] Gabriel Hospodar, Benedikt Gierlichs, Elke De Mulder, Ingrid Verbauwhede, and Joos Vandewalle. Machine learning in side-channel analysis: a first study. 

Journal of Cryptographic Engineering , 1(4):293–302, 2011. [JJ00] QUISQUATER Jean-Jacques. A new tool for non-intrusive analysis of smart cards based on electromagnetic emissions. the sema and dema methods. 

Eurocrypt2000 Rump Session, May , 2000. [JP21] Minmin Jiang and Vasilis F Pavlidis. A probe placement method for efficient electromagnetic attacks. In SMACD/PRIME 2021; International Conference on SMACD and 16th Conference on PRIME , pages 1–4. VDE, 2021. [KJJ99] Paul Kocher, Joshua Jaffe, and Benjamin Jun. Differential power analysis. In 

Annual international cryptology conference , pages 388–397. Springer, 1999. [Lana] Langer amplifier PA 306. https://www. langer-emv.de/en/product/vorverstaerker/37/ pa-306-sma-set-vorverstaerker-100-khz-bis-6-ghz/817/ pa-306-sma-vorverstaerker-100-khz-bis-6-ghz/816 . Accessed: 2025-05-13. [Lanb] Langer Bias-Tee BT 706. https://www.langer-emv. com/en/product/mfa-aktiv-1-mhz-bis-6-ghz/32/ mfa-01-set-mikrosonden-1-mhz-bis-6-ghz/283/ bt-706-bias-tee-fuer-langer-sonden/149 . Accessed: 2025-05-13. [Lanc] Langer EMV RF 7-4 near-field probe. https://www. langer-emv.de/en/product/rf-passive-30-mhz-3-ghz/35/ rf-k-7-4-h-field-probe-30-mhz-up-to-1-ghz/9 . Accessed: 2025-05-02. [Land] Langer ICR HH250-75 set. https://www.langer-emv.de/en/ product/near-field-microprobe-sets-icr-hh-h-field/26/ icr-hh250-75-set-near-field-microprobe-0-5-mhz-2-ghz/755 .Accessed: 2025-05-04. [Lane] Langer ICS 105 – IC Scanner 4-axis positioning system. 

https://www.langer-emv.de/en/product/langer-scanner/41/ ics-105-set-ic-scanner-4-achsen-positioniersystem/144 . Accessed: 2025-05-02. [LBBH98] Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE ,86(11):2278–2324, 1998. [LBHL25] Insup Lee, Daehyeon Bae, Seokhie Hong, and Sangjin Lee. Leakdit: Diffusion transformers for trace-augmented side-channel analysis. IEEE Computer Architecture Letters , 2025. [LH17] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings .OpenReview.net, 2017. E.Bursztein M.Gruber K.Král J-M Picod M.Probst G.Sigl 19 [Man04] Stefan Mangard. Hardware countermeasures against DPA – A statistical analysis of their effectiveness. In Tatsuaki Okamoto, editor, CT-RSA 2004 ,volume 2964 of LNCS , pages 222–235. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, February 2004. [MBTL13] David P. Montminy, Rusty O. Baldwin, Michael A. Temple, and Eric D. Laspe. Improving cross-device attacks using zero-mean unit-variance normalization. 

Journal of Cryptographic Engineering , 3(2):99–110, June 2013. [MNS +25] Dev Mehta, Seyedmohammad Nouraniboosjin, Maryam S Safa, Shahin Tajik, and Fatemeh Ganji. Swarm in em hay: Particle swarm-guided probe place-ment for em sca. Cryptology ePrint Archive , 2025. [NAC82] NSA NACSIM. 5000: Tempest fundamentals. National Security Agency ,1982. [NLKS +24] Lojenaa Navanesan, Nhien-An Le-Khac, Mark Scanlon, Kasun De Zoysa, and Asanka P Sayakkara. Ensuring cross-device portability of electromagnetic side-channel analysis for digital forensics. Forensic Science International: Digital Investigation , 48:301684, 2024. [NNR +24] Mabon Ninan, Evan Nimmo, Shane Reilly, Channing Smith, Wenhai Sun, Boyang Wang, and John M Emmert. A second look at the portability of deep learning side-channel attacks over em traces. In Proceedings of the 27th International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses ,pages 630–643, 2024. [PHJ +17] Stjepan Picek, Annelie Heuser, Alan Jovic, Simone A Ludwig, Sylvain Guilley, Domagoj Jakobovic, and Nele Mentens. Side-channel analysis and machine learning: A practical perspective. In 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pages 4095–4102. IEEE, 2017. [PPM +21] Stjepan Picek, Guilherme Perin, Luca Mariot, Lichao Wu, and Lejla Batina. SoK: Deep learning-based physical side-channel analysis. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2021/1092, 2021. [PWGS25] Matthias Probst, Alexander Wiesent, Michael Gruber, and Georg Sigl. Probe-Nav - fast, precise and repeatable positioning of electromagnetic probes for local side-channel attacks. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2025/854, 2025. [Ris] DS1203A high precision electromagnetic probe. https://www.keysight. com/us/en/product/DS1203A/high-precision-electromagnetic-probe. html . Accessed: 2025-05-13. [RWM19] Bastian Richter, Alexander Wild, and Amir Moradi. Automated probe repositioning for on-die EM measurements. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2019/923, 2019. [SMY09] François-Xavier Standaert, Tal Malkin, and Moti Yung. A unified framework for the analysis of side-channel key recovery attacks. In Antoine Joux, editor, 

EUROCRYPT 2009 , volume 5479 of LNCS , pages 443–461. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, April 2009. [SS18] Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory cost. In International conference on machine learning ,pages 4596–4604. PMLR, 2018. 20 Profiling Resilient to Change in Probe Position [ZSS24] Muhammad Rusyaidi Zunaidi, Asanka Sayakkara, and Mark Scanlon. Sys-tematic literature review of em-sca attacks on encryption. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10030 , 2024.