Title: 

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.05334v1

Published Time: Wed, 08 Apr 2026 00:22:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 1

Abstract —Current transformer ( CT) saturation is one of the 

dominant causes of relay protection devices’ malfunctions, whi ch 

pose a threat to the safe operation of the power system. To address 

th is problem, we propose a hybrid physical model - and 

data -driven method . The me th od firstly detect s the CT saturation 

and then compensa te s it to reproduce the real waveform .

Considerin g the multi -factor and strong nonlinear ity of CT 

saturation , a data -driven model, namely the Full y Convolutional 

Network (FCN) , is built to detect the operation status of CT . As 

for the compensation , a physical model of short -circuit current is 

used for it s conciseness and universality. Through tactfully 

integrating the data model and the physical model, the proposed 

method is endowed with two major merits: the arduous 

adjustment of universal thresholds and parameters in existing 

method s is avoided, and the deficiency in generalization and 

interpretability of the data -driven method is assuaged. Simulat ion 

and experimental results verify the effectiveness of the proposed 

method. Furthermore , its application potential to future 

protection is explored .

Index Terms —Current transformer (CT) , CT saturation ,

physical model -driven , data -driven, Full y Convolutional Network 

(FCN). 

NOMENCLATURE 

Acronyms 

CT Current transformer .

EKF Extended Kalman filtering .

FC N Full convolutional network .

NLS Nonlinear leas t squares. 

LM-NLS Levenberg -Marquardt nonlinear least squares .

Variables and Parameters 1i

Short -circuit current /Primary current of CT .2i

Secondary current of CT .mi

Magne tizing current of CT. 2i

Normalized output current of CT. mI

Amplitude of the steady -state short -circuit current 

Initial phase angle of fault. 1T

System time constant. 

System angular speed. f

System frequency. 

This work was partially supp orted by the Joint Funds of the National 

Natural Science Foundation of China and State Grid Corporation of 

China(U1866603) , National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 52007143), 

China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2021M692526) and Open Fund of 

State Key Laboratory of Operation and Control of Renewable Energy & 

Storage Systems (China Electric Power Research Institute). 

All authors are with Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Smart Grid, Xi'an Jiaotong 

University, Xi'an, China (e -mail:{songhaoyang, zhghao, bhz hang} @xjtu.edu.cn, 

{zyb970305,405331375}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn). 2T

Time constant of the secondary closed -loop 

circuit of CT. r



Remanence of CT .S

Serial saturation information. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

URRENT transformer (CT) is a kind of essential 

measuring device for protection and state monitoring in the 

power system , of which function is to accurately measure the 

current of the primary device s. However, the accuracy of CT 

may be affected by CT saturation which usually occur s when 

the short -circuit current especially its DC componen t is 

enormous . Serious CT saturation will cause the malfunctions of 

the relay protection device s, pos ing a threat to the safe 

operation of the power system. Therefore, how to deal with the 

issue of CT saturation has attracted widespread attention. 

As magnetic saturation is an inherent property of 

ferromagnetic materials, a straightforward solution to CT 

saturation is to design and manufacture the non -ferromagnetic 

CT s, e.g., optical current sensor  [1]  and Rogowski coil  [2] .

However, such transducers suffer the problems of noise 

sensitivity and accuracy , thus they are not widely used in 

practice . For ferromagnetic CT s, introducing an air gap in the 

core magnetic path can significantly decrease the remanence 

and keep CT unsaturated  [3] . TPY -type CT s [4]  and TPZ -type 

CT s [5]  are designed according to such technical ide as. The 

TPY -CT has a small air gap in the core and its remanence is less 

than 10% of the saturation flux. Due to its excellent transient 

performance, T PY -type CT is widely used in relay prote ction 

especially in high -voltage transmission power system s.

Moreover , TPZ -type CT eliminates remanence by increasing 

the air gap . However, the poor accuracy of TPZ -CT impedes its 

application. In addition , the air ga p of TPY -CT and TPZ -CT 

also lead to a larger size and higher cost. Benefited from the 

stable performance and acceptable cost, the traditional CTs, i.e. 

the closed -core P class CT s, are still widely used in current 

power systems especially in distribution s ystems and non -high 

voltage transmission systems .

Retaining the ferromagnetic core closed, scholars attempt to 

keep the CT unsaturated by changing the circuit structure. 

Power electronic -based method  [6] , [7] , and voltage 

feedback -based method  [8]  were proved to be robust and 

efficient . However, these methods need to reconstruct the 

hardware structure of CT, which lead s to high cost s. By 

contrast, t he software -based methods are cost -effective , which 

can be divided into three type s: 1) CT model -based methods; 2) 

# CT Saturation Detection and Compensation : A 

# Hybrid Physical Model - and Data -Driven  Method 

Songhao Yang, Member, IEEE, Yubo Zhang, student member, IEEE, Zhiguo Hao, Member, IEEE, 

Ze xuan Lin, Baohui Zhang, Fellow, IEEE 

# CIEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 2

signal processing methods; 3) data -driven methods. 

The first type attempt s to reproduce the saturated CT 

secondary current by modeling magnetization characteristic s of

the ferromagnetic core . Based on the measured magnetization 

curve  [9] -[11] , simplified magnetization curve  [12] , [13] , and 

Frö hlich hysteresis technique  [14] , the magnetizing current 

could be accurately and efficiently estimated to correct the 

distorted CT se condary current . However, their effectiveness 

essentially depends on the precise estimation of the initial 

oper ating status of CT , which is difficult in practice .

The key of the signal processing methods is to distinguish the 

unsaturated waveforms from the saturated waveforms. To 

achieve this goal, the mutation information of the CT operating 

status transition is g enerally used . In  [15] , the section of the 

unsaturated CT current waveform was empirically determined ,

which may result in insufficient utilization of information and 

low accuracy. To automatically identify the unsaturated curre nt 

waveform , multiple -order derivative information of the current 

waveform was used in  [16] -[18] . Similarly, in  [19] , [20] , the 

wavelet transfor m was used to extract the high -frequency 

component for the detection of the onset and endpoints of the 

CT saturation. However, the above methods are sensitive to 

measurement noises and dependent on the preset threshold ,

which limit s their application poten tial . The extended Kalman 

filtering (EKF)  [21]  and morphological filtering technique s

were used in  [22] , [23]  to integrate the CT saturation detection 

and correction for it s outstanding merits of accuracy and 

robustness against the noises. However, it is challenging to 

design proper filter parameters that suit different scenarios .

Data -driven methods, such as artificial neural networks 

(ANNs) , have been introduced to cope wi th the problem of CT 

saturation  [24] , [25] . Although data -driven methods have 

powerful capabilities in data processing and feature mining, 

the ir interpretability and generalization are seriously 

co ncerned .

Each of the above mentioned methods has its pros and cons. 

Through the proper integration , it is greatly promising to realize 

the complementa ry advantages among the methods, and 

ultimately better performance. This hybrid -driven idea has been 

extens ively explored in power systems  [26] -[28]  and other 

research fields  [29] , [30] . Inspired by these wo rks, this paper 

proposes a hybrid physical m odel - and data -driven method to 

cope with the problem of CT saturation. The major 

contribution s of this paper are list ed as follows: 

1) Tactful integration of physical model and data model is 

realized. The proposed hybrid -driven method is divided into 

two serial parts, namely the data -driven detection and physical 

model -driven compensation of CT saturation. The Full y

Convolutional Network (FCN)  [31]  is built to detect the 

operat ion status of CT which is multifacto rial and strongly 

nonlinear . The n a cl assic short -circuit current model is applied 

to reproduce the real current , and the model parameters are 

estimated by the efficient Levenberg -Marquardt nonlinear least 

squares (LM -NLS) algorithm  [32] . The data -driven and 

physical model -driven methods deal with different parts of the 

CT saturation according to their respective advantages and 

finally solve this problem together. 

2) The detection of CT saturation is more accurate and easier 

due to the powerful nonlinear modeling and feature extraction 

capabilities of FCN . Thus, the arduous selection of universal 

thresholds and model parameters in existing CT saturation 

detection methods is avoided . Moreover, FCN is 

com putationally efficient and can process variable -length 

samples, which significantly enhanc es its applicability to 

various scenarios .

3) The generalization and interpretability of the proposed 

method are enhanced by introduc ing the short -circuit current 

model in the CT compensation pa rt . These features provide a 

guarantee for the effectiveness of the method and greatly 

improve its application potential in future relay protection. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 

pr esents the mechanism of CT saturation and the f ramework of 

the proposed method. In Section III, the implementation of the 

method is explained in detail. The effectiveness of the proposed 

method is validated by simulation results in Section IV. The 

experimental verification and its application potential are 

explored in Section V. Finally, Section VI draws the 

conclusion. 

II. MECHANISM OF CT SATURATION AND FRAMEWORK OF 

PROPOSED METHOD 

In this section, the expression of the transient magnetic flux 

of CT under short -circuit current is derived under certain 

post ulates, which reveals the mechanism and the major 

influence factors of CT saturation. Besides, the framework of 

the proposed hybrid -driven method is elaborated. 

A. Mechanism of CT saturation 

As above mentioned, CT saturation is an intricate nonlinear 

and mult ifactorial problem. Although data -driven methods are 

independent of the physical models, a deep analysis of the 

mechanism of CT saturation is undoubtedly necessary to figure 

out the major influence factors, which conduces to construct a 

relatively complete sample database to improve the accuracy 

and generalization of the CT saturation detection model. 

The equivalent circuit of CT converted to the secondary side 

is shown in Fig. 1  [9] -[11] . Concretely, R and L denote the 

resistance and inductance respectively, and subscript s 1, 2, m,

and l represent the primary side, secondary side, magnetizing 

branch , and load of CT. 

> Fig. 1 The equivalent circuit of CT.

Normally, the CT secondary current reflect s the system 

current accurately as the magnetizing current is negligible , as 

shown by the blue curve in Fig. 2. When a short -circuit fault 

occurs, f or simplicity, it is assumed that the system operates in 

the no -load condition and the impedance angle of the IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 3

shor t-circuit loop is 2

 . Then , the short -circuit current can be 

expressed as (1) [6] .1/1( ) [cos cos( )] t T mi t I e t

 −

= − +

, (1)

where mI is the ampl itude of the steady -state short -circuit 

current;  is the initi al phase angle of fault; 1T is the system 

time constant ; and 2 f

 = ,f is the system frequency. 

To analyze the transient characteristics of CT, the following 

simplifications and assumptio ns are essential. 

1) Assuming the magnetizing inductance to be a constant. 

2) Assuming the remanence to be zero. 

3) Ignoring the magnetizing resistance. 

4) Ignoring the leakage inductance and resistance of the 

primary side. 

Based on the above assumptions, the follow ing equation can 

be derived from the equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 1. 221 2

( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )   

> mmssm

di t di tL L i t R dt dt i t i t i t

= + = + 

, (2)

where 2s lL L L= + ,2s lR R R= + .

Combining (1) and (2), the magneti zing current can be 

expressed as follows. 21 2   

> /2//1212

( ) [ sin( ) sin cos ( )]  

> t T mmt T t T

Ii t t eTT T e eT T

    

> −−−

= − + ++ −−

, (3)

where 2 ( ) / m s sT L L R= + represents the time constant of th e

secondary closed -loop circuit of CT .

Then the transient magnetic flux can be calculated by (4).2 1 2    

> 2///1212

( ) ( ) [ sin( )sin cos ( )]     

> m m mmrt T t T t T r

L i t L I t tN NT T T e e eT T

 − − −

= + = − + ++ − +−

, (4)

where N is the number of turns of CT , and r

 is remanence. 

Based on (4), the transient magnetic flux under short -circuit 

current is as shown by the red line in Fig. 2. The comparison 

between the blue curve and red curve indicates that the 

magnetic flux under short -circuit curre nt is much larger than 

that of the normal condition, which may cause CT to work in 

the nonlinear region, namely CT saturation .

More importantly , the Eq. (4) reflect s the major influence 

factors that associate with the transient magnetic flux of CT ,

whi ch provides a theoretical basis for building a complete 

sample database by parameter traversal in the simulation model .

Specifically, the major influence factors include the time 

constant of the system 1T , the initial phase angle of fault  , the 

amplitude of short -circuit current mI , the time constant of the 

CT sec ondary closed -loop circuit 2T , the remanence r

 , and 

the nonlinearity of the magnetizing .

B. Framework of the proposed method 

Th e framework of the proposed method is shown in Fig. 3. 

Overall, the essential idea is to use the data -driven model to 

handle the complex and nonlinear characteristics of the CT in 

CT saturation detection and adopt a physical model , i.e. the 

short -circuit current model, to reproduce the real short -circuit 

current waveform. Hence , the tact ful combination of the data 

model and the physical model is implemented in sequence .

Concretely, saturation detection refers to monitoring the CT 

operation status and distinguish ing the onset and endpoints of 

the saturated and unsaturated portion s, while saturation 

compensation refers to restoring the saturated secondary 

current of CT. A complete sample database , the key to the 

accuracy and generalization of the data model , is established by 

traversing the major influence factors in the simulation model .

Be sides, the technology of data augmentation is applied to 

further improve the completeness of the database . The 

correlation between CT saturation and the influence factors is  

> Fig. 2 Ma gnetic flux character of CT under fault condition and normal
> condition. (a) Tra nsien t magnetic flux curve. (b) Magnetization curve.
> Fig. 3 Framework of the proposed method.

IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 4

implicit in the sample database and then captured by the data 

model. The above pro cess, including the database construction 

and the model training, is implemented offline. Then, the 

well -trained data model is deployed online to detect CT 

saturation. 

As for the saturation compensation, the physical model of 

short -circuit current is retai ned for its conciseness and 

universality . Considering that the premises required by the (1)

cannot be satisfied in engineering practice, a more accurate 

short -circuit current model is shown as follows. 1/1 cos( ) t T 

i A t Be 

  −

= + +

(5)

Given the short -circuit current model in (5), saturation 

compensation is simplified as a problem of parameter 

estimation . After the saturated and unsaturated segments are 

distinguished by the data model, the saturated output waveform 

of CT can be efficiently compensated based on unsaturated data 

and the LM -NLS algorithm, as shown in Fig. 3. The fra mework 

of the proposed method is briefly introduced above, and the 

specific implementation will be elaborated in section III. 

III. IMPL EMENTATION OF PROPOSED METHOD 

The details of the proposed method are explained here. 

A. The data -driven model for CT saturation detection 

As shown in Fig. 3, the data -driven model consists of two 

parts, namely the construction of the sample database , the 

cons truction and training of the network . T he sample database 

is constructed firstly based on the simulation model . Then, the 

technique of data augmentation is applied to improv e the 

completeness of the sample database. To facility the application 

of the data model in postmortem analysis and online detection, 

a one -dimensional FCN is built which can efficiently process 

the variable -length samples .

1) The construction of sample database 

As indicated in subsection II -A, CT saturation is mainly 

affected by the syste m parameters 1T , ,mI , and CT 

parameters 2T ,r

 . With the aid of power system sim ulation 

software, e.g., PSCAD/EMTDC, enormous simulati on data can 

be generated through parameter traversal .

To train the FCN, the saturation information for samples is 

essential. Since the real short -circuit current and the CT 

secondary current can be expediently obtained from the 

simulation , the saturation i nformation for each sample can be 

acquired by comparing the waveforms of primary current and 

secondary current which are denoted as i1 and i2, respectively. 

Thus, a straightforward criterion is given as follows. 1 21

| [ ] [ ] | 1, max(| |) [ ] , 1, 2, 0, 

i k i kiS k k nelse 

− = =

, (6)

where S denotes the serial saturation information and n denotes 

the dimension of the sample. The threshold,  , determines the 

se nsitivity of the saturation detection. Specifically, the smaller 

means higher sensitivity, but the robustness will decrease 

accordingly . Numerous simulations reveal that a reasonable 

value range is 0.01 -0.1 and 0.05 

 =  is adopted in this paper . If 

CT is saturate d at the k-th sample point, S[k] is equal to 1; 

otherwise, it is equal to 0. 

Moreover, to avert the problem of numerical instability, it is 

necessary to normalize the input of FCN, i.e., the secondary 

cur rent of CT. The normalization is shown in (7).222

[ ] [ ] , 1, 2, ,max(abs( )) 

i ki k k ni 

> 

= =

, (7)

where 2i denotes the normalized secondary current of CT with 

the value range of -1 to 1. 

The normalized secondary current of CT and corresponding 

saturation information constitute a training sampl e, i.e. 2( , )i S ,

as shown in Fig. 4.          

> Fig. 4Normalized secondary current and its corresponding saturation
> information .
> Fig. 5 Saturation detection model based on FCN .

2) Data augmentation 

Data augmentation has been widely applied to im proving the 

generalization capabilities of deep neural networks in recent 

years  [33] . For the same purpose, the data augmentation is 

implemented in this paper, and details are given as follows.  

> ⚫

Polarity reversal 

For each sample 2( , )i S , the polarity reversal is performed on 

the network input to form a new sample 2( , )i S

− . 

> ⚫

Noise addition 

For each sample 2( , )i S , a certain intensity Gaussian white 

noise is added in the network input to form a new sample 2( ( , ), )noise i SNR S

, while SNR represents the intensity of the 

noise. Considering that there are various low pass filters in the 

signal acquisition system, the noise intensity is generally small, 

so the value of the noise intensity is set as 40dB or 35 dB . 

> ⚫

Variable -length window 

For each sample 2( , )i S , intercepting a certain length can 

produce a new sample 2( [1: ], [1: ]), i k S k k n  . In this paper, the IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 5

variable -length window can be 10ms, 20ms, 40ms, and 60ms, 

for coping with different application scenarios. 

3) The FCN for CT saturation detection 

Considering the limitations of the Convolutional Neural 

Network (CNN) and the Deep Belief Network on the input and 

output sizes, this paper uses the FCN to detect th e CT saturation 

for its adaptability to the variation of input size . Moreover, 

although the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) can also handle 

input signals of variable size, the sequential operation 

characteristic limits its computational efficiency. As a var iant 

of the CNN, the FCN not only retains the computational 

efficiency of the CNN but has the ability of the RNN to process 

data with variable size. The specific structure of FCN for CT 

saturation detection is shown in Fig. 5. To maintain the 

consistency o f input and output sizes, the network contains only 

convolution operations, and the convolution kernel is 

one -dimensional. Besides, for multiple receptive fields and 

fewer network parameters, the branch structure and unit 

convolution (i.e. 1*1 kernel) of G oogLeNet in  [34]  are used for 

reference when building the FCN as shown in Fig. 5.

B. The physical model for CT saturation compensation 

The essence of CT saturation compensation is to re produce 

the real short -circuit current from t he distorted secondary 

current of CT. Based on the physical model of short -circuit 

current in (5), the CT saturation compensation is essentially 

converted int o a parameter estimation problem . In this paper, 

the LM -NLS algorithm is used to solve the above issue due to 

its advantage of stability and efficiency .

First, the short -circuit current 1i is discretized according to 

the sampling in terval. 1 1[ ] cos( ) k tt k t

i i k A k t Be 

> 

  =  = =  + +

, (8)

where 11 / T

 = −  and t denotes the sampling interval. A ,

,B and  are the parameters to be estimated. 

The index sequence of the unsaturated sampling points 

identified by FCN is denoted as Ι .1 2[ ]Nk k k=I

(9)

As CT is unsaturated, the sampling values of secondary 

current in the set I are effective observed values of the 

short -circuit current. Therefore, saturation compensation is a

parameter estimation problem based on a definite physical 

model and its effective observation data. The nonlinear least 

squares (NLS) algorithm is an efficient method for estimating 

the pa rameters of the nonlinear model as shown in (8). The 

specific implementation is given as follows. 

The unsaturated data can form a n error vector , F. Each 

vecto r element denotes the error between the observed value 

and the real value of the physical model at the sampling time .1  

> 2112

[ ] cos( )( )[ ] cos[ ] N   

> ktktNN

i k A k t Be i k A k t Be 

> 

  

> 

 −  + + =   −  + + 

F x 

, (10 )

where [ ]A B

 =x .

Hence , the parameter estimation problem in (5) is equivalent 

to the following least square problem. 21arg min || ( ) || 2

= x

x F x 

(11 )

The Jacobian matrix is essential to solve the least square 

problem in (11 ), as expressed in (12 ).1 1  

> 111

cos( ) sin( )cos( ) sin( ) N N        

> ktktktktNNN

k t A k t e Bk te k t A k t e Bk te 

> 

      

> 

  + −  +  =    + −  +  

J

(12 )

To balance the stability and convergence speed, the 

Gauss -Newton method modified by the LM algorithm is 

applied in this paper, and the pseudo -code is give n in TABLE I .

In the LM -NLS algorithm, the damping parameter  is 

introduced to deal with the numerical stability problem caused 

by the irreversibility of the Hessian matrix, H. The parameter 

is the gain ratio, which indicates the quality of  .       

> TABLE I
> PSEUDO -CODE OF SATURATION COMPENSATION BASED ON LM -NLS
> *Recommended value 3
> 10
> −
> =,-15
> 10
>  =

IV. SIMULATION VALIDATION 

A. Simulation model and network model 

1) Database construction by simulati on 

A simulation model of a double -ended power system is built 

in PSCAD/EMTDC, as shown in Fig. 6. The system voltage is 

220kV and the frequency is 50Hz. The turn ratio of CT is 

2000 :5. Note that the CT in Fig.6 adopts the JA model built -in 

PSCAD . The model can accurately simulate the magnetization 

process using domain wall motion with pinning effects to 

describe hysteresis loops of soft magnetic materials  [35] . JA 

model is widely used due to the ease in numerical 

implementation a nd its fewer parameters. CT CT  

> Fig.6 Schematic diagram of the simulation system .

IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 6

As discuss ed in section III -A, the dat abase is constructed by 

the traversal of key parameters . Despite mI cannot be set 

directly, it can be indirect ly controlled by the fault resistance, fR

. TABLE II presents t he specific values of all major 

influence parameter s. A total of 146 ,510 original samples have 

been obtained. For the balance of sample number, a part of 

unsaturated sam ples is removed and 102 ,571 valid samples 

have remained. Further more , the data augmentation technique 

in section III -A is used by three times, as a result of which the 

number of samples increases to 410,284. 

2) Network construction and training 

TensorFlow is one of the mainstream deep learning 

platform s developed by Google, which provides various 

high -level APIs to streamline the construction and training 

process of the network model. In this paper, TensorFlow is used 

for the construction and training of the s aturation detection 

model. 

The branched FCN network shown in Fig. 5 is constructed 

based on the Functional API while the one -dimensional 

convolutional layer is the built -in layer module of TensorFlow. 

Moreover, the activation function of the middle layer s is tanh ,

and that of the output layer is sigmoid , so the network output is 

restrained in the range of 0-1. 

In the supervised learning mode, the mean square error 

between the network output and the reference output is defined 

as the loss function , which fo rces the network output to 

gradually approach the reference output. Specifically, the 

Adam optimizer is adopted for gradient backpropagation and 

network parameter update. Except for the learning rate, the 

default parameter values of the Adam optimizer in TensorFlow 

are used (beta1=0.9, beta2=0.999, epsilon=1e -7). A descending 

learning rate is applied for better convergence performance, i.e., 

1e -3 as the initial value and halved every 25 epochs. Besides, 

the training set and the test set samples are divided into 9:1. 

B. Effectiveness verification 

Firstly, the proposed hybrid -driven method is verified under 

different saturation scenarios , results shown in Fig.7. Fig. 7(a), 

(b) , and (c) show that FCN can accurately distinguish between 

the saturated and unsaturated portion under different saturation 

levels, which verifies the high sensitivity of the data model for 

CT saturation detection. Fig. 7(b), (c) , and (d) show that the 

start time of saturation, whether in the first cycle or non -first 

cycle, does not affect th e accuracy of FCN , which extends the 

application of the proposed method . Furthermore, the 

effectiveness of the proposed saturation compensation model is 

demonstrated in Fig. 7 as the compensation result is almost the 

same as the real short circuit current of the power system . The 

excellent performance of the proposed compens ation model is 

of great significance to prevent the relay protection devices 

from malfunction. 

To further verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, 

the performance indexes shown in (13 ) are proposed as follows .( )( )                                  

> ()()()1121()()()21211()()()312122()()()4121221

max 1, 1, 2, ,max 1          

> kkkkNkkkkkkkkNkkkk

e i i ie i i iN k Ne i i ie i i iN  

> ==

 = − = − = = − = −

# 

(13 ),

where N denotes the number of samples. The indexes 1e and 3e

represent the worst -case sample while 2e and 4e represent the 

overall perfo rmance. A smaller performance index value 

indicates that the CT measurement is more accurate. 

TABLE III present s the comparison of performance indexes 

with/without the compensation. The EKF  [21]  and modified            

> TABLE II
> VALUES OF MAJOR INFLUENCE PARAMETERS
> Symbol Quantity Values
> system 1T
> /ms time constant 50, 6 0, 70, …, 290, 300 
> initial fault angle 0,15 , …, 315 ,330 f

R         

> /fault resista nce 0, 1, 10, 50, 100
> CT2T
> /s time constant 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.25, 1.5, 1.75, 2 r
> 
> residual flux 80% ,40% ,20% , 0
> Fig. 7 . Effect of propo sed method on typical samples. (a) Unsaturated sample.
> (b) Slightly saturated sample. (c) Heavily saturated sample. (d) Non -first wave
> saturated sample.
> TABLE III
> COMPARISON OF PERFORMANCE INDEXES WITH /WITHOUT COMPENSATION 1

e2e3e4e                 

> Without Compensation 1.0001 0.7876 0.9693 0.5668
> Method in ref. [21] 0.0736 0.0512 0.0754 0.0431
> Method in ref. [25] 0.26 40 0.1256 0.2740 0.1321
> Proposed Method 0.0499 0.0241 0.0608 0.0153

IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 7

least square error  [25]  are selected as references to the proposed 

method. The results show that the performance indexes are 

reduced significantly after compensation, indicating that the 

above three methods can all effectively mitigate the CT 

satu ration. Moreover, the proposed hybrid -driven method is 

more effective than the reference methods. After the 

compensation, the overall error decreases from 78% to 2.0% 

(2.41% and 1.53%) while the error of worst -case is no more 

than 6.1% (4.99% and 6.08%). Therefore, it is verified that the 

proposed method can effectively detect the saturation and 

accurately reproduce the real current waveform. 

C. Data window Flexibility and calculation efficiency 

The proposed method can flexibly deal with variable -length 

sampl es due to the adoption of FCN. Fig. 8 shows the results of 

the proposed hybrid -driven method under different data 

window lengths, i.e. 0.01s, 0.06s, 0.02s, and 0.04s, respectively. 

The results indicate that the proposed method can accurately 

detect the sat urated portion and compensate the current 

waveform as same as the real current waveform with variable 

data window length. This feature is of high engineering value, 

as the proposed method can be directly applied to various 

scenarios with different requirem ents for the data window 

without extra modification. 

More over , the proposed method has high computational 

efficiency under different data window lengths . As the 

computation burden of the LM -NLS algorithm is much less 

than that of the FCN , the calculation time of the hybrid -driven 

method is dominated by the FCN. The relation between the 

computation time of the proposed method and the data window 

length is presented in Fig. 9, which is approximately linear as 

the time complexity of the one -dimensional FCN is exactly ( )O N 

if N denotes the sample length. This linear characteristic 

is beneficial to highlight the flexibility and applicability of the 

proposed method . Specifically, with the hardware 

configuration shown in Fig. 9, the computatio n time is about 

3ms in a considerable range of data window s, which can satisfy 

most scenarios in practice .

In summary, the proposed method is not only capable of 

dealing with variable -length samples, but also computationally 

efficient. This is a major a spect that the proposed method is 

superior to the existing methods based on ANN, which require 

a fixed window due to the network structure. 

D. Sen sitivity and robustness 

In th e issue of CT saturation , sensitivity emphasizes the 

ability to detect slight satur ation while robustness represents 

anti -noise performance. The mutation information contained in 

the noise may be mistaken for CT saturation, which makes 

accurate saturation detection more difficult. Although various 

measures such as morphology filtering an d Kalman filtering 

have been taken to improve the anti -noise ability of CT 

saturation detection method s, it remains a very challenging task 

to select a proper threshold to achieve the balance of sensitivity 

and robustness. 

Fig. 1 0 shows the comparison of sensitivity and robustness 

between the proposed method and the state -of -the -art 

software -based method in  [21] . The contrast between Fig. 14(a) 

and (b) indicates that a higher threshold,  , can indeed 

im prove the robustness of CT saturation detection, however at 

the cost of sensitivity. Conversely, reducing the threshold 

makes the method accurately recognize slightly saturated 

samples, but it weakens the anti -noise performance. Hence, for 

filter -based met hods like  [21] , it is arduous to choose a proper 

threshold that can balance robustness and sensitivity. By

contrast, the proposed hybrid -driven method can not only 

accurately detect light saturation samples, but also has good 

an ti -noise performance, as shown in Fig. 10 . The excellent 

balance of robustness and sensitivity is achieved by the 

proposed method as it avoids the complicated threshold 

parameters tuning .                

> Fig. 8 Performance of the proposed method on samples with different data
> window length. (a) 0.01s. (b) 0.06s. (c) 0.02s. (d) 0.04s
> Fig. 9 The calculation time of the proposed method with different data window
> Fig. 10 Sensitivity and robustness comparison between the pr oposed method
> and reference [21] in (a) sl ightly saturated s cenario without noise and (b)
> unsa turated scenario with 35dB noise .

IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 8

V. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION AND APPLICATION 

Similar to other data -driv en methods, the proposed 

hybrid -driven method faces the essential cha llenge that whether 

the network trained by certain CT model simulation data can be 

applied in scenarios with other CT model s or even real CT 

devices. In this section, the hardware experim ent is carried out 

to verify the generalization of the proposed method. Moreover, 

its potential application to relay protection is also explored. 

A. Hardware Experiment 

Since the difference between CT models and real CT devices 

is inevitable, a hardware expe riment is necessary to verify the 

validity of the proposed method in practice . In this regard, an 

experimental platform for CT saturation test was designed and 

established to obtain the real saturated current . The design and 

hardware platform are given in Fig. 11. 

As Fig. 11 shows, the primary circuit of the experiment 

consists of an ac generator, a current measurer, breaks , and the 

adjustable resistor and inductor. The primary current can be 

accurately measured by a high -power precise non -inductive 

resist ance , i.e. the current measurer . The adjustable resistor and 

inductor are used to reali ze different short -circuit currents. The 

secondary current is measured by the tested CT de vices via the 

current busbar. The DC voltage source is equipped to 

demagnetize CT if necessary. 

Note that the short -circuit current is synthesized by Fig. 11 .

The damping dc component of the short -circuit current is 

change d by the breaker with a different closing angle. The 

adjustable resistor dominates the time -constant of dc 

compon ent while the adjustable inductor controls the periodic 

ac component of the short -circuit current. By changing the 

inductance, resistance , and closing angle of the primary circuit, 

different short -circuit currents can be synthesized to adequately 

test the transient transformation characteristics of CT. 

Three types of CT devices are tested to fully verify the 

performance of the proposed method. The details of the tested 

CTs are listed in TABLE IV. ‘SH’ and ‘ZX’ represent different 

manufacturers while ‘5P20’ and ‘5P30’ indicate the accuracy 

level. For example , ‘5P20 ’ requests that the composite error of 

secondary current is less than ±5% when the prima ry current is 

20 times the rated current. 

For each type of CT device, 20 sets of experiments were 

performed, and a total of 60 sets of experimental data were 

obtained. For better verification, the experimental results 

include the unsaturated, slightly saturated , and severely 

saturated current waveforms. 

B. Generalization performance verification 

In this section, t he generalization verification of the proposed 

method is twofold. On the one hand, the JA model and the 

Lucas model  [36]  are adopted for simulation verification .

Differ ent from the JA model, the Luc as model is based on the 

technical scheme of establishing the equivalent nonlinear 

circuit of CT. According to the simulation system shown in Fig. 

6, the Lucas CT model built -in PSCAD is used to generat e the 

data set , the parameter traversal shown in TABLE II. On the 

other hand, a more realistic test is carried out with the real CT 

measurement data obtained by the above hardware experiment.  

> Fig. 12 Comparison of performance indexes with/without the proposed method
> for different CT model /experiment data s et .

Fig. 1 2 shows the performance of the proposed method in the 

JA model data set (410,284 samples), Lucas model data set 

(146,510 samples) , and experimental data set (60 samples) . The 

indicators “ C” and “ NC ” in Fig. 1 2 repres ent the samples with 

and witho ut the proposed saturation compensat ion method ,

respectively. The performance indexes without compensation 

are large, indicating that the current saturation is considerable 

in three data set s. However, the performance indexes are 

reduced significantly afte r the compensation, which verifies 

that the saturat ed currents are effectively compensated with the 

proposed method in all data sets . Though the performance 

indexes in the Lucas model data set and experiment data set are 

slightly larger than that in the JA model data set, the overall 

error (e2 and e4) is less than 2.85% (2.76% and 1.94% for Lucas 

model data set, 2.79% and 2.85 % for experiment data set ). In 

conclusion, though trained by JA model simulation data, the 

proposed method is accurate and effective in the scenarios with                 

> TABLE IV
> PARAMETERS OF THE EXPERIMENTAL CT
> CT type Accuracy
> level
> Transformation
> ratio
> Rated
> capacity
> Power
> factor
> SH5P20 5P20 1:1000 20VA 1
> SH5P30 5P30 1: 1000 20VA 1
> ZX5P20 5P20 1:1000 20VA 0.8
> (a ) Experimental design
> (b) Experimental platform
> Fig. 11. CT saturation hardware experiment

IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 9

other CT model s or CT devices .

C. Application Potential in relay protection 

To explore the application potential, the proposed method is 

assumed to integrate in to the relay protection and verify 

whether the performance of the protection is improved. In this 

regard, the current differential protection principle , one 

classical protection principle, is adopted. 

Denote op I as the operating current and re I as the 

restraining current, which can be expressed as follows  [37] :,op ij ji re ij ji I I I I I I= + = −

(14 )

The percentage differential relay operate s when &op o op re I I I KI  

, (15 )

where oI is a pick -up current and (0,1) K  is the restraint 

coefficien t, and K=0.3 is adopted in this paper. The data 

window of the differential protection is 20ms. 

The differential protection is equipped on a transmission line 

i-j. Assum e that the CT on the i-th side is never saturated while 

the CT on the j-th side is one of the tested CTs. Under the 

condition of external fault, ij I is the same with primary current 

provided by the current measurer and ji I is measured by the 

tested CTs provided by the data collector in Fig. 11 .

TABLE V compares the malfunction rate of the protection 

with/without the proposed method . The results show that the 

overal l malfunction rate is 23/60 before the compensation, 

indicating that the protection performance is seriously 

influenced by the CT satu ration . After the compensation by the 

proposed method, all malfunctions are effectively avoided, and 

the protection performance is guaranteed. 

Fig. 13 shows how the proposed method avoids the 

malfunction of current differentia l protection that is caused by 

CT saturation . The measured current waveforms, operating 

current and restraining current, and the output signal of current 

differential protection are given in Fig.13 . Fig. 13 (a), (b), and (d)

show that the saturated current produces a considerable 

operating current and finally leads the protection to 

malfunction. After compensation by the proposed method in 

Fig. 13 (a), the saturated current is accurately detected and 

properly compensated, thus the operating current is quietly 

small in Fig. 13 (c). The malfunction is eventually avoided as 

shown in Fig.13 (d).

D. Discussion on t ime delay 

If the saturation compensation method is integrated into the 

protection, its calculation time may cause a time delay. Fig.14 

illustrates the influen ce of such time delay on relay operation. 

As Fig. 14 shows, for the scenarios without saturation 

compensation, the primary protection will trigger immediately 

after the fault is detected. Denote 1

 as the length of the data 

window and 2

 as the calculation time of the protection, then 

the trigger time of the primary protection is 1 2pt

 = + . For the 

backup protection with a time delay Tdelay , the trigger time is 

tb=tp+T delay . Note that the rel ay is continuously calcul ating with 

the sliding data window during the delay time. Generally 

speaking, 2

 is larger than the sampling time interval, thus the 

updating period of the sliding data window is 2

 , as shown in 

Fig.14. 

For the scenarios with the proposed method, the primary 

protection operates after obtaining the data window, 

compensating the saturated currents , and calculating the 

protection. Thus, the trigger time of the primary protection 

is 1 3 2pt

##    = + + , which leads to a time delay of 3

 compared 

with the scenarios without compensation. Similarly, the trigger 

time of the backup protection with the proposed method is b p delay t t T = +

, and a time delay of 3

 is inevitable. In 

conclus ion, a time delay of 3

 is introduced for the relay 

protection after the integration of the proposed method. 

Compared with the ben efits of av oi ding protection 

malfunctions, t he slight time delay by the integration of the 

proposed method is worthwhile.                           

> TABLE V
> PERFORMANCE OF PROPOSED METHOD IN ANTI -MALFUNCTION OF CURRENT
> DIFFERENTIAL PROTECTION
> CT type Malfunction rate
> without proposed metho dwith proposed method
> SH5P30 6/20 0/20
> SH5P20 7/20 0/20
> ZH5P20 10/20 0/20
> Fig. 13. Protection -related sequential information. (a) Measured current
> waveform. (b) Operating current and restraining current before saturation
> compensation. (c) Operating current and restraining after satu ratio n
> compensation. (d) Trip or block signal of current differential protection.
> Fig. 14 The time -delay caused by the proposed method in relay protection. 1
> 
> : length of data window, 2
> : updating period o f dat a window 3
> 
> : time delay of the proposed method, Tdelay : delay time of backup protection

IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 10 

It should be noted that the updating period of the sliding data 

window changes to 2 3

 + with the proposed method. In other 

words, the updating period of the dat a window is extended by 3

 .

This restriction is acceptable for the protection as the general 

value for 2

 is 3-5ms while the calculation time of the 

proposed method is nearly 3ms. Moreover, the calculation tim e

can be further reduced with the development of chip technology. 

It has been reported that the calculation speed of Google's AI 

chip TPU is 15 -30 times faster than that of GPU/CPU  [38] .

Therefore, though the proposed method cou ld not be deployed 

in actual protection device s presently due to the limited 

computing power of the microprocessor, it has great application 

potential in future protection. 

VI. CONCLUSION 

In this paper, a hybrid physical model - and data -driven 

method is propo sed for CT saturation detection and 

compensation. A one -dimensional FCN is constructed to detect 

CT saturation and the physical model of short -circuit current is 

used to compensate saturated current. The major merits of the 

proposed method consist in the tactful integration of the 

physical model and data model. The special structure of FCN 

endows it with the flexibility of processing variable -length 

samples, which is the main aspect that the proposed method is 

superior to the existing ANNs -based methods. Co mpared with 

the state -of -the -art software -based method s, the proposed 

method can effectively balance robustness and sensitivity 

without arduous parameters tuning. The hardware experiment s

further verif y the gene ra lization of the proposed method and 

explore its app li cation potential in relay protection . The 

malfunctions of the protections caused by CT saturation can be 

effectively avoided by the proposed method at the cost of a

slight time delay .

REFERENCES 

[1] S. Kucuksari and G. G. Karady, “Complete model dev elopment for an 

optical current transformer,” IEEE Trans. Power Del. , vol. 27, no . 4, pp. 

1755 –1762, Oct. 2012. 

[2] M. Chiampi, G. Crotti, and A. Morando, “Evaluation of flexible Rogowski 

coil performances in power frequency applications,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. 

Meas. , vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 854 –862, Mar. 2011. 

[3] B. Bozoki, H. J. Calhoun, and C. M. Gadsden et al., “IEEE Committee 

Report, Gapped core current transformer characteristics and performance,” 

IEEE Trans. Power Del. , vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1732 –1740, Oct. 1990. 

[4] IEEE Guide for the Application of Current Transformers Used for 

Protective Relaying Purposes , IEEE Standard C37.110, 2007. 

[5] E. Lesniewska and W. Jalmuzny, “Influence of the number of core air gaps 

on transient state parameters of TPZ class protective current transformers,” 

Inst . Eng. Technol. Sci., Meas. Technol. , pp. 105 –112, Mar. 2009. 

[6] M. Davarpanah, M. Sanaye -Pasand, and R. Iravani, “A saturation 

suppression approach for the current transformer —Part I: Fundamental 

concepts and design,” IEEE Trans. Power De l. , vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 

1928 -1935, Jul. 2013. 

[7] E. Hajipour, M. Vakilian, and M. Sanaye -Pasand, “Current -transformer 

saturation prevention using a controlled voltage -source compensator,” 

IEEE Trans. Power Del. , vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 1039 –1048, Apr. 2017. 

[8] M. De lzendeh and H. Kazemi Karegar, “Current Transformer Saturation 

Compensator by Using Negative Voltage Feedback, ” IEEE Trans. on 

Power Del. , vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 1200 -1208, June 2020. 

[9] Y. C. Kang, J. K. Park, S. H. Kang, A. T. Johns, and R. K. Aggarwal, “An 

al gorithm for compensating secondary currents of current transformers,” 

IEEE Trans. Power Del. , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 116 –124, Jan. 1997. 

[10] N. Locci and C. Muscas, “A digital compensation method for improving 

current transformer accuracy, ” IEEE Trans. on Power D el. , vol. 15, no. 4, 

pp. 1104 -1109, Oct. 2000. 

[11] N. Locci and C. Muscas, “Hysteresis and eddy currents compensation in 

current transformers,” IEEE Trans. on Power Del. , vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 

154 -159, April 2001. 

[12] Yong Cheol Kang, Ui Jai Lim, Sang Hee Kang and P. A. Crossley, 

“Compensation of the distortion in the secondary current caused by 

saturation and remanence in a CT,” IEEE Trans. on Power Del. , vol. 19, 

no. 4, pp. 1642 -1649, Oct. 2004. 

[13] E. Hajipour, M. Vakilian and M. Sanaye -Pasand, “Current -Transformer 

Saturation Compensation for Transformer Differential Relays, ” IEEE 

Trans. on Power Del. , vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 2293 -2302, Oct. 2015. 

[14] Ozgonenel, O., “Correction of saturated current from measurement current 

transformer,” IET Electr. Power Appl. , vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 580 -585, Aug. 

2013. 

[15] Jiuping Pan, Khoi Vu and Yi Hu, “An efficient compensation algorithm 

for current transformer saturation effects, ” IEEE Trans. on Power Del. ,

vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1623 -1628, Oct. 2004. 

[16] A. Hooshyar, M. Sanaye -Pasand, and M. Davarpanah , “Development of a 

new derivative -based algorithm to detect current transformer saturation, ”

IET Gen., Transm. Distrib. , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 207 –217, 2012. 

[17] B. Schettino, C. Duque, P. Silveira, P. Ribeiro, and A. Cerqueira, “A new 

method of current -transfor mer saturation detection in the presence of 

noise,” IEEE Trans. Power Del. , vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 1760 –1767, Aug. 

2014. 

[18] Y. C. Kang, S. H. Ok, and S. H. Kang, “A CT saturation detection 

algorithm,” IEEE Trans. on Power Del ., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 78 –85, Jan. 

20 04. 

[19] Y. Y. Hong and D. W. Wei, “Compensation of distorted secondary current 

caused by saturation and remanence in a current transformer,” IEEE Trans. 

Power Del. , vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 47 –54, Jan. 2010. 

[20] R. P. Medeiros and F. B. Costa, “A wavelet -based transfor mer differential 

protection with differential current transformer saturation and 

crosscountry fault detection,” IEEE Trans. Power Del. , vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 

789 –799, Apr. 2018. 

[21] F. Naseri, Z. Kazemi, E. Farjah and T. Ghanbari, “Fast Detection and 

Compensatio n of Current Transformer Saturation Using Extended 

Kalman Filter, ” IEEE Trans. on Power Del. , vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 1087 -1097, 

June 2019. 

[22] Xiangning Lin, Li Zou, Qing Tian, Hanli Weng and Pei Liu, “A series 

multiresolution morphological gradient -based criteri on to identify CT 

saturation, ” IEEE Trans. on Power Del. , vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1169 -1175, 

July 2006. 

[23] T. Ji, M. Shi, M. Li, L. Zhang, and Q. Wu, “Current transformer saturation 

detection using morphological gradient and morphological decomposition 

and its ha rdware implementation,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 64, no. 

6, pp. 4721 –4729, Jun. 2017. 

[24] D. C. Yu and J. C. Cummins, “Correction of current transformer distorted 

secondary currents due to saturation using artificial neural networks,” 

IEEE Trans. Power Del. , vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 189 –194, Apr. 2001. 

[25] F. Haghjoo and M. Hadi Pak, “Compensation of CT distorted secondary 

current waveform in online conditions,” IEEE Trans. Power Del. , vol. 31, 

no. 2, pp. 711 –720, Apr. 2016. 

[26] Q. Wang, F. Li, Y. Tang, and Y. Xu, “Integrating model -driven and 

datadriven methods for power system frequency stability assessment and 

control, ” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 4557 –4568, Nov. 

2019. 

[27] M. K. Jena, S. R. Samantaray and B. K. Panigrahi, “A New Adaptive 

Dependability -Security Approach to Enhance Wide Area Back -Up 

Protection of Transmission System, ” IEEE Trans. on Smart Grid , vol. 9, 

no. 6, pp. 6378 -6386, Nov. 2018. 

[28] J. Wang, H. Zhong, X. Lai, Q. Xia, Y. Wang and C. Kang, “Exploring Key 

Weather Factors From Analytical M odeling Toward Improved Solar 

Power Forecasting, ” IEEE Trans. on Smart Grid , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 

1417 -1427, March 2019. 

[29] H. Zhang, Q. Li, Z. Sun, and Y. Liu, “Combining Data -driven and 

model -driven methods for robust facial landmark detection,” IEEE Trans. 

Inf. Forensics Secur ., vol. 13, no. 10, pp. 2409 –2422, Oct. 2018. 

[30] J. S. Kinnebrew, J. R. Segedy, and G. Biswas, “Integrating model -driven 

and data -driven techniques for analyzing learning behaviors in openended 

learning environments,” IEEE Trans. Learn. Te chnol. , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 

140 –153, Apr. –Jun. 2017. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 11                               

> [31] E. Shelhamer, J. Long, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks for
> semantic segmentation, ”IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , vol. 39,
> no. 4, pp. 640 –651, Apr. 2017.
> [32] J. J. Moré , “The Levenber g-Marquardt algorithm: Implementation and
> theory,” in Numerical Analysis. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 1978, pp.
> 105 –116.
> [33] J. Nalepa, M. Myller, and M. Kawulok, “Training -and test -time data
> augmentation for hyperspectral image segmentation,” IEEE Geosci.
> Remote Sens. Lett. , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 292 –296, Feb. 2020.
> [34] C. Szegedy et al., “Going deeper with convolutions, ”in Proc. IEEE Conf.
> Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. , Jun. 2015, pp. 1 –9.
> [35] D. C. Jiles and D. L. Atherton, "Theory of ferromagnetic hysteresis," J.
> Magn. Magn. Mater. , vol. 61, nos. 1 –2, pp. 48 –60, 1986.
> [36] J. R. Lucas, P. G. McLaren, W. W. L. Keerthipala, and R. P. Jayasinghe,
> “Improved simulation models for current and voltage transformers in relay
> studies,” IEEE Trans. Power Del. , vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 152 –159, Jan. 1992.
> [37] S. Dambhare, S. A. Soman and M. C. Chandorkar, "Adaptive Current
> Differential Protection Schemes for Transmission -Line Protection," IEEE
> Trans. on Power Del. , vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 1832 -1841, Oct. 2009.
> [38] Jouppi et al., “In -datacenter perf ormance analysis of a tensor processing
> unit,” in ACM/IEEE 44th Ann. Int. Symp. Comput. Architecture (ISCA) ,
> Toronto, ON, Canada, 2017, pp. 1 –12.

Songhao Yang. (S’18 -M’19 ) was born in 

Shandong, China, in 1989 . He received the 

B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical 

engineering from the Xi’an Jiaotong 

University, Xi’an, China, in 2012 and 

2019, respectivel y. Besides, he received 

the Ph. D. degree in electrical and 

electronic engineering from Tokushima 

University, Japan, in 2019. 

Currently, he is an Assistan t Professor at Xi’an Jiaotong 

University. His research interest includes powe r system control 

and protection .

Yu bo Zhang . (S’21 ) received the B.S. 

degree in electrical engineering from 

Xi’an Jiaotong University, China, in 2019. 

He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree 

in the school of Electrical Engineering in 

Xi’an Jiaotong University. His main field 

of interest includes the control for 

renewable energy, and power system 

frequency stability. 

Zhiguo Hao . (M’10 ) was born in Ordos, 

China, in 1976. He received his B.Sc. and 

Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering 

from Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 

China, in 1998 and 2007, respectively. He 

has been a Professor with the Electrical 

Engineering Department, Xi'an Jiaotong 

University. His research interes t includes 

powe r system protection and control .

Zexuan Lin . received the B.S . degree 

from Shandong University, Jinan, China, 

in 2016. He is currently working toward 

M.S . degree in Xi'an Jiaotong University, 

Xi'an, China. His research intersests is the 

appl ication of artificial intelligence in the 

relay protection. 

Baohui Zhang . (SM‘99 -’F’19 ) was born 

in Hebei Province, China, in 1953. He 

received the M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in 

electrical engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong 

University, Xi’an, China, i n 1982 and 1988, 

respectively. He has been a Professor in the 

Electrical Engineering Department at 

Xi’an Jiaotong University since 1992. His 

research interests are system analysis, 

control, communication, and protection.