Title: Estimating coil features from an equilibrium

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12339v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 00:37:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 4

Markdown Content:
Rodr´ ıguez et al. 

# Estimating coil features from an equilibrium 

E. Rodr´ ıguez 1 and W. Sengupta 2

> 1)

Max Planck Institute for Plasma Physics, 17491 Greifswald, Germany a) 2) Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08543, USA 

(Dated: 15 April 2026) 

We present an explicit theoretical framework for constructing artificial modular coils based solely on equi-librium properties, achieved through the formulation of a current potential defined on flux surfaces. We demonstrate that key measures of coil complexity –particularly coil non-planarity– are strongly governed by local magnetic field properties and show promise as predictors for more realistic coil configurations. This approach provides both a pathway towards deeper understanding of equilibrium–coil relationships and a potential practical proxy for coil design. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The stellarator 1–3 is an attractive magnetic confine-ment concept for achieving controlled thermonuclear fu-sion. Its flexibility and generality make it unique in its ability to confine plasmas while avoiding common shortcomings of other confinement designs 2,4 . However, achieving good confinement in stellarators requires care-ful tailoring of the magnetic field geometry 5. In practice, reproducing three-dimensional (3D) stellarator magnetic fields requires coils, or other current distributions, of con-siderable geometric complexity. This imposes a signifi-cant burden on stellarator design and necessitates careful consideration within the design process itself. A natural question therefore arises: which stellarator fields are par-ticularly amenable to simple coils? A central difficulty in addressing such a question is the fundamental lack of uniqueness of the inverse coil prob-lem: the same magnetic field within a volume can, in principle, be reproduced to arbitrary accuracy by many external current distributions. 6,7 Thus, in practice, the problem is commonly approached as an optimisation task in which the field error is minimised. Despite substantial progress, particularly in optimisation strategies and regu-larisation techniques, 8–12 an important question remains: to what extent is a given current distribution solution in-trinsic to the target magnetic field, and to what extent is it a consequence of the optimisation procedure and the imposed constraints? Recent insight into this question has been gained through the analysis of intrinsic magnetic field length scales, such as L∇B.13,14 However, such measures remain one step removed from the coil design problem, as they do not directly describe properties of the current distribu-tions. In this Letter, we exploit a theoretical construction by which a coil set can be defined directly and uniquely for a given stellarator equilibrium. The construction is based on a surface current defined on a magnetic flux surface, thereby removing the inherent non-uniqueness of the coil problem. Although the resulting coil set is ar-

> a) Email: eduardo.rodriguez@ipp.mpg.de

tificial, it directly encodes intrinsic properties of the mag-netic field that can be leveraged to assess the behaviour of more realistic coil sets. We therefore propose it as a practical tool for coil assessment and as a framework for gaining deeper theoretical insight into stellarator coil design. 

II. CONSTRUCTING THE COIL SET 

We begin from the standard Merkel formulation 8 of the coil problem. Let B be a vacuum magnetic field in a toroidal volume Ω (we leave the finite plasma β prob-lem to future work), whose boundary ∂Ω a flux surface, 

B · ˆn = 0, with ˆ n the surface normal. Introducing a toroidal winding surface S enclosing Ω, the Merkel prob-lem consists of finding a scalar potential Φ( θ, ϕ ) as a func-tion of the poloidal and toroidal angles, respectively, such that the surface current 

K = 1

μ0

ˆn × ∇ Φ, (1) reproduces B in Ω. In practice, this inverse prob-lem is solved numerically via least-squares minimisation (e.g. NESCOIL 8, REGCOIL 7, QUADCOIL 15 ). Different so-lutions obtained in this way depend on the imposed regularisation 15 and the choice of S.The lack of uniqueness is due to the finite volume be-tween S and ∂Ω, but it can be eliminated by considering instead the limiting case, S → ∂Ω. In this limit, the winding surface coincides with a flux surface, and by di-rect application of the virtual casing principle 16,17 , we have a closed form for the surface current 

K = − 1

μ0

ˆn × B, (2) evaluated on ∂Ω. The surface current is simply orthogo-nal to the magnetic field everywhere and therefore intro-duces a discontinuity in its tangential component. It can be seen as a special case of [18]. 

> arXiv:2604.12339v1 [physics.plasm-ph] 14 Apr 2026

Rodr´ ıguez et al. 2        

> FIG. 1. Ideal coil set and principal curvature on last close flux surface. 40-coil construction computed using Eq. (2) for the precise QA stellarator 19 at ρ= 1. The sur-face colour represents the largest principal curvature of the flux surface, indicating the central role of surface curvature on controlling the coil curvature.

That the above current reproduces B follows directly from the vanishing of the exterior field. Applying Biot–Savart and writing B = −∇ Φ0 in Ω, one obtains 

B¯Ω = μ0

4π

Z

> S

K × ∇ ′

 1

ρ



dS′ (3) = μ0

4π

Z

> S

ˆn · B ∇′

 1

ρ



dS′, (4) which vanishes identically since B·ˆn = 0 on a flux surface. The tangential discontinuity thus enforces B throughout Ω. It is therefore imperative that S be a flux surface, since the problem in which S and ∂Ω deviate in a non-trivial way cannot be treated so straightforwardly. We shall later see with a practical example what such devia-tions look like in practice. In this construction, then, the current potential is pre-cisely the restriction of the vacuum scalar potential to the boundary, Φ = Φ 0|∂Ω (up to a constant), and is unique. In fact, this is just a scaled version of the Boozer toroidal 

φ angle. If we then interpret this current density, as it is customary, as the limit of a set of filamentary coils (see an example in Figure 1), then the coils must be modular; 

i.e. , they close poloidally.  

> III. COIL GEOMETRY AND INTRINSIC COMPLEXITY

The geometry of the resulting coils provides direct in-sight into their intrinsic complexity and how the equilib-rium properties influence it. For coils defined as contours of constant Φ on a flux surface, we can express their cur-vature as ˜κn = 2 H − κn, ˜κg = 1

B ˆτ ˆτ : ∇B, (5) where ˜ κg and ˜ κn are the geodesic and normal curvatures of the coils, κn the curvature of the magnetic field lines,             

> FIG. 2. Illustrations of geodesic curvature and non-planar behaviour of coils. a) Diagram showing a flux sur-face ∂S in the presence of a significant breathing, i.e. , toroidal variation due to change in toroidal magnetic field magnitude. It clearly shows the misalignment between curvature of the coil and the surface, and thus a significant geodesic curva-ture. b) Sketch of a flux surface patch with a varying field strength in (both) ( θ, φ ). Fieldlines of Bbunch where the field is stronger, leading to the perpendicular current Khav-ing a clear S-like excursion. The normal is taken off the page for this illustration.

ˆτττ = B × ˆnnn/ |B| and H is the mean curvature of S.20 

The total curvature of the coils is then by definition ˜ κ =(˜ κ2 

> g

+ ˜ κ2

> n

)1/2.The normal curvature is primarily set by the surface geometry. Because MHD stability generally pushes mag-netic field lines to have as negative a normal curvature as possible, but also due to their tendency to minimise bending energy, coils which are orthogonal to them tend to align with the direction of largest principal curvature 

κ1 (i.e. , poloidally). The role of κ1 is illustrated in Fig-ure 1, and clearly shows why sharp surface features or extreme elongation are to be avoided. Projecting this behaviour outwards, we expect the normal curvature of the coils to drop as roughly ˜ κn ∼ 1/ρ , the normalised radial flux coordinate, as the winding surface is pushed away from the plasma. The particulars of the winding surface shape will of course matter. The geodesic curvature is the other component of cur-vature, and represents bending of the coil within the surface. This is controlled by a component of ∇B de-scribing the bending of field lines in the direction of the coils. Picturing this bending as principally a misalign-ment of the surface normal to a toroidal cut, significant geodesic curvature naturally arises in configurations with large toroidal variations in the field strength (see Fig-ure 2a) or elongation (stretching). Configurations with little toroidal variations minimise this contribution, as is the case of Figure 1. Another important aspect of the coils we have not re-ferred to yet is the non-planarity of coils. The concept could be discussed through the coil torsion, but torsion is a rather sensitive quantity, especially if the curves have straight sections. Thus we opt in this letter for a more di-rect physical picture leaning on the bending of field lines over flux surfaces. As pictured in Figure 2b, a simul-taneous poloidal and toroidal variation in the strength Rodr´ ıguez et al. 3                           

> FIG. 3. Comparison of current potential at ρ= 1 .The plot shows a comparison of the current potential as computed by the least squares REGCOIL (with regularisation λ= 0) solve and reconstruction using the VMEC field, showing that the asymptotic limit is as theoretically shown, recovered. The numerical REGCOIL construction can only be done approximately, as the singular behaviour of Biot-Savart demands inordinate resolution when the winding and evaluation surface become very close. Here, we have used ∆ ρ∼0.03, with a total of Nθ×Nφ= 4 ×10 6collocation points on the winding surface and MΦ×NΦ= 20 ×20 Fourier modes for Φ.

of the magnetic field over a flux surface will make field lines bend, and thus following Eq. (2), coils will as well. This picture suggests that stellarator fields that min-imise toroidal variations in the poloidal behaviour will be amenable to planar coils, consistent with recent work on the figure-8 stellarator 21 and providing a criterion for designing simpler fields. Making this somewhat more quantitative, the toroidal topology, together with Amp´ ere’s law, forces a strong inboard-outboard variation of the poloidal field, with a basic ∼ ρ scaling. Since the coil length scales as 

L ∼ ρ, the accumulated out-of-surface excursion is then expected to scale as ∆ z ∼ ρ2. Coil non-planarity can thus be expected to roughly grow quadratically with radius. This strong increase can also be understood by invoking the superposition principle to describe equivalently a set of 3D coils with finite ∆ z excursion as a set of planar modular coils together with additional non-linked saddle coils. The saddle coil field being that of dipoles decays rapidly (in fact as ∼ 1/ρ 2), and thus the excursion it rep-resents must therefore grow strongly. The basic scaling can be exploited to extrapolate the non-planarity of coils away from the plasma on the basis of a direct assessment of our equilibrium field. There is therefore a tight competition between the cur-vature and the non-planarity of the coils as the coil set is placed further and further away from the plasma. Amore detailed description is left for future work.  

> IV. NUMERICAL NON-PLANARITY ASSESSMENT

To provide some practical support for the scaling argu-ments above, with particular focus on the non-planarity of coils, we consider an example optimised stellarator, the precise QA equilibrium 19 , and apply our construction to it. First, we apply our explicit construction to the nested set of flux surfaces obtained from VMEC 22 . Given the co-variant representation of the magnetic field, 

Bθ = ∂θ Φ, Bϕ = ∂ϕΦ, (6) we may solve directly for the periodic part ˜Φ of the poten-tial Φ = ˜Φ + Gϕ + Iθ directly using the spectral represen-tation of the field. Here, ( G, I ) are the Boozer currents. In Figure 3, we compare the current potential reconstruc-tion this way against a numerical solution obtained using 

REGCOIL , showing the right asymptotic behaviour. We can then compute the non-planarity ∆ z of the con-structed coil sets by defining, for each constant Φ con-tour, a least-squares plane and computing the largest nor-mal deviation from it. Our construction can be evaluated on every flux surface within ρ ≤ 1, and is shown in Fig-ure 4 as a solid line. The dotted line is its ρ2 extrapola-tion. To compare it to REGCOIL , we choose three refer-ence surfaces at different ρ, and solve the Merkel problem at a set of surfaces constructed by a uniform outward-displaced of each reference surface. Within ρ ≤ 1, it is clear that the standard REGCOIL choice of winding sur-face leads to a coil excursion bounded from below by our construction, which in these cases minimise the excur-sion. This difference is mainly due to the winding surface shaping, which leads to a breakdown of the modular coil assumption for the REGCOIL construction beyond a criti-cal ρ (see triangular scatter in Figure 4). This effect lies outside the scope of the present framework and is clearly not intrinsic to the equilibrium. Rodr´ ıguez et al. 40.5 1 1.5 2

ρ

10 −2

10 −1

> ∆z/a

∝ ρ2

VMEC REGCOIL 

FIG. 4. Coil non-planarity assessment. The plot shows a comparison of the coil non-planarity, ∆ z (normalised to the minor radius a at ρ = 1), as predicted by applying our closed form current density from the VMEC equilibrium (solid black line) and its extrapolation (dotted line), against the solution obtained from REGCOIL (scatter). Each of the three groups of REGCOIL solves is computed considering the normal deformation of the reference VMEC surfaces at normalised radii 

ρ = 0 .35 , 0.55 , 1.0 (squares) by different amounts d, up to when modular coils are no longer a solution (triangles). The effective ρ is then defined as 1 + d/a , where a is the minor radius for the VMEC equilibrium at ρ = 1. 

Beyond the last closed flux surface, the quadratic ex-trapolation appears to continue to provide a lower bound on coil non-planarity. A more thorough exploration re-mains to be carried out, but we hypothesise that a suit-ably deformed surface, or more freely moving filamentary coils, will be able to approach this limit. Techniques for extending the flux-surface solution outward 23 and pro-vide pseudo-flux-surfaces (or flux minimising surfaces) may thus be of practical interest. In any event, we pro-pose the use of this equilibrium based excursion measure as a guiding design feature for simplifying coils. 

V. CONCLUSIONS 

In this Letter, we have introduced a construction in which a coil set is defined uniquely for a given stellarator equilibrium by placing the current potential on a flux surface. This removes the intrinsic non-uniqueness of the coil design problem and yields a direct correspon-dence between magnetic-field structure and coil geom-etry. Within this framework, key geometric properties of the coils, such as curvature and non-planarity, can be related explicitly to local properties of the magnetic field. The theoretical construction can serve as a lower-bound estimate for the excursion of practical coil designs. First comparisons with more realistic approaches indicate promising predictive power, which merits further study. More broadly, the present approach opens the possibility of systematically identifying equilibria that admit sim-pler coil sets, understanding them more deeply, and for-mulating quantitative criteria for coil simplicity directly in terms of magnetic-field structure. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors would like to acknowledge fruitful discus-sion with Michael Drevlak, Annika Zettl, Per Helander, Andrea Pavone and Gabriel Plunk, Elizabeth Paul, Mike Zarnstorff, John Kappel, Sanket Patil, Pedro Gil, Lanke Fu, and Matt Landreman. 

AUTHOR DECLARATION 

The authors have no conflicts to disclose. 

DATA AVAILABILITY 

Data sharing is available upon reasonable request.